Fordham Law School
FLASH: The Fordham Law Archive of Scholarship and History
Congressional Materials	Twenty-Fifth Amendment Archive
4-1-1957
Presidential Inability: Hearing Before the Special
Subcommittee on Study of Presidential Inability of
the Committee on the Judiciary, House of
Representatives, 85th Congress
Special Subcommittee To Study Presidential Inability; Committee on the Judiciary. House of Representatives. United States.
Follow this and additional works at: http://ir.lawnet.fordham.edu/
twentyfifth_amendment_congressional_materials
Part of the Law Commons 
Recommended Citation
Special Subcommittee To Study Presidential Inability; Committee on the Judiciary. House of Representatives. United States., "Presidential Inability: Hearing Before the Special Subcommittee on Study of Presidential Inability of the Committee on the Judiciary, House of Representatives, 85th Congress" (1957). Congressional Materials. 4. http://ir.lawnet.fordham.edu/twentyfifth_amendment_congressional_materials/4
This Book is brought to you for free and open access by the Twenty-Fifth Amendment Archive at FLASH: The Fordham Law Archive of Scholarship and History. It has been accepted for inclusion in Congressional Materials by an authorized administrator of FLASH: The Fordham Law Archive of Scholarship and History. For more information, please contact tmelnick@law.fordham.edu.
PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY
HEARING	1619 -1
BRFORII TILE
SPECIAL sumimmirm ON
STUDY OF PRESIDEN AtligATILIT
UNITED STATES
GOVLATIMI1 PRINTING OFFICIO
WleitINGTON 1957
OF 11
commtrrn THE JIMMIA_ItY
HOUSE OF	Ivy II
EMI	coN
FIRST SESSION
ON
1,11081,1.: OF Pit SII)	1 L	111
APRI 1, 1 7
Printed for tile u of the Committ n the aullary
9042
COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY EMANUEL. CELLER, New York, Mims*
FRANCIS E. WALTER, Pennsylvania THOMAS 1. LANE. Massachusetts MICHAEL A. FERMAN, Ohio FRANK cinct.r. Kentucky EDWIN E. WILLIS, Loulsbula JAMES IL FRAZIER, Je., Tennessee PETER W. RODINO, 1R., New JerscY E. L. FORRESTER, Georgia BYRON O. ROGERS, Colorado HAROLD D. DONOHUE, Mn. achusells JACK 11. BROOKS, Texas
WILLIAM M. TUCK, Virginia ROBERT T. ASHMORE, South Carolina CHARLES A. BOYLE, Illinois EARL 01111DOPF, Pennsylvania JOHN DOWDY, Texas
LESTER HOLTZMAN, New York
IlEss E. Dine, Ste, Director
WILLIAM R. FOLEY, Otstrai (Wad
WALTER M. BESTERMAN, Lefisiallee Assistant
WALTER R. LEE, Leristatite Assistant
CITARLES J. ZINN, Low Derision Counsel
CYRIL F. BRIMFIELD, 00tintei
E. Wiu.ovoinsy MIDDLETON, .1/1,, Associate Counsel
SPECIAL SUBCOMMITTEE ON STUDY OF PRESIDENTIAL. INABILITY
EMANUEL CELLER, New York, Minus
FRANCIS E. WALTER, Pennsylvania	KENNETH B. KEATING, New York
JACK B. BROOKS, Texas		WILLIAM M. McOULLOCII, Ohio Wuusu R. FOLEY, OtEttOralittiti
II
KENNETH II. KEATINO, New York WILLIAM M. McCULLOCII, Ohio PATRICK J. IIILLINGS, Calitonda WILLIAM E. MILLER, New York DEAN P. TAYLOR, New York USHER L. BURDICK, North Dakota LAURENCE CURTIS. Massachuset.s JOHN M. ROBSION, J. Kentucky DEWITT S. HYDE, Maryland RICHARD If. POVF, Virginia WILLIAM C. CRAMER, Florida ARCH A. MOORE, ln., West Virginia RUSSELL W. KEENEY, Illinois F. JAY NINITZ, Indiana
CONTENTS
Text of—	Poise
House Joint Resolution 38 	1
House Joint Resolution 293 	2
House Joint Resolution 294 	2
House Joint Resolution 295 	2
H. R. 0510 	3
Testimony of —
Hon. Herbert. Brownell, Jr., Attorney General of the United Statms,
accompanied by lion. IVilliom P. Rogers, Deputy Attorney General
of the United States 	4
Documents:
Committee on Federal Constitution, New York State Bar Association,
March 29, 1957 	32
Editorial the Washington Past, April 1, 1057 	33
Martin Taylor, of the committee on Federal Constitution, New York
State liar Association, April 9, 1957 	35
PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY
MONDAY, APRIL 1, 1957
UNITxt)Ailis IfiiirE414 of Ecto.:8ENTA1'i
COM AIIM: I.; ON THE
SPECIAL Ho nowt st	n TO STUDY PRES( ISHNVIA ta° II NA 1111,111%
Washington, D. a
Ttig Huila 1111 nilteo Inet, pursuing to roll` fit 10:07 a. in., in room :140 of Bit Old ilotise Officio Building, lion, Itnnnut'l ('oiler(chnirman of Bin subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Enintowl	(chhirnum), lornocis E.
Watterofnek Brooks, Kenneth B. Kent Ow, and Yiiiini>t M. McCulloch.
Also present: itepresentoti yes Peighan, iillcr, Ilydo, R ohsion, 0111111t31%- Keenny,And -Moore, and 1YilIii11F1 It. 14'610v, getters! counsel.
(The committee bud under consideration the following resolutions nod bill:)
(II. J. Ites. 3R. MO Vont. lit sm..]
JOINT It Kett11,11TION l'reptsInx an amendment le the Constitution of the United Mates rellting to eases where the esIdent Is unatde to dbertrge the powers and ditties of fits Moe
ltrsotced by the &nate and Muse of Iteprtscntaticcs of the United States of America in Congress assembled (Iwo-thirds of each House concurring therein), That the follow-
ing intiele Is proposed	nn nmendment to the Constitution of the United Slates,
width shall be valid to nil intents and purposes us part of the Constitution when ratified by the legislatures of three-fourths of the several States:
"Anttcm—
"firerion 1. In ease of the removal of the President from office, or of his death or resignation, the Vice President shall become President.
"Sse. 2. If the President nnuounces that he is tunable to dischalle the powers and duties till& office, such tamers and • lin les shall devolve on the Vico President.
"Sim 3. The Congress may, by a conenrren1 resolution npproved by two-thirds of each House, suggest tint the President is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office. Por the purpose of considering such 1:1 concurrent resolution. the Vice President may convene the Senate and the Sueaker of the House of Representntives nifty convene the House of Representatives.
"If the Congress suggests that the President I9 unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office, the Supremo Court shall deter:nine whether or not the President is able to discharge such powers and ditties. If the &promo Court determines that the President is until& to discharge such powers and duties, they shall devolVe on the Vice' President,
"Sru'. 4. 'If the Powers And ditties of the President &Volvo Mt the Vice President pursuant to section 2 or 3 of this article the exercise of such powers and duties shall not be resumed by the President until the Supreme Court, on the request of the President, determines that the President is able to discharge the powers and duties of his office.
"Stie. 6. The Congress may by law implement the foregoing sections of this article.
"Sim 0. The Congress may by law provide for the ease of removal, death, resignation, or Inability, both of the President and Vice President, declaring what officer shrill then act as President, and such Offal shall act accordingly, until the disability bo removed, or a President shall be elected.
"Sze. 7. Clause 0 of section 1 of article 11 of the Constitution of the United States is hereby repealed.
1
2	tittEstinNTIAti
"Ste. h. This milt+, shall not apply lit any person holding the °Hive of President
when this nrl tele was proposed	the Congress,
This rtiliele shill'	Istoiterolive naives it 1411n11	!eon rullfied its
nn nmentlinont to the Constitution it the logIsIntures of three-fourths or the severs) Slates within seven yennt from the dale of Its submission."
111. 3.	2M.ctlh	141,S4
JinN'I' 11 1-1441 1,1 IT1 ON: 11010Mo to 1 he !nobility of 1 ho	IcId	411.441Loto ho floor's owl thole, of
111% ollior
ne$1)11.01	.Seattle and Itonse of Representatives of Mr United Stote$ of
.1tortieo in t'oniness ossetnIpled, 'Nog in t'itS4, of t ho removal of the President from otlice, or of his death, or resignation, Om Viet President
.seeinite Presillent.
Ste. '2. If the Pres140111 11111O11111Vos flint !It' Is Most&	illselos ego the powers
awl duties of his oitio,, Novi,	slut les shun	Ho. flee
ProshIslist.
Sri.. 3. Whenever the Viet, President or the person next in the lino of suceession to the Presidenev is sultslhvl
Milt he President, or the person then discharging the potters and stilt los of sali I oiliest, its Ills. east' 1118 1' be, Is muddy to discharge said 11101to'N. 11 11,1 sloth's, suchlsormos shall all1Velle bot11 1 1011seS of tho Congress mid nitholinco find the powers and tulles of the ohs. hors. I lovolvoll (pot' him.
Ste. 1. If Me powers andle:s of the Presiihnil devolve ovum el 11y meatusplin,ii,kill hi snot hilts '2 not 2 of this resolution. Iho o‘oreig„. of suds powors nod ditties sloth be resumed by the I 'resItivill upon the 1'ii`NIlle1104 An !Min nN'inotit• or his ability not 1111 Olt tout I11011,111•1011 to ret011110.
111 3. 110-4. WI Mitt Cofof 1.1
-1 ION 1' 11 lz$11 1.11'TION	all Amendment 1 o she 040111111m of 1 ho Offilod shuos taming lo
CANS w het., 11v Viiksblent	to .tootii re Ike t" el:44111d sloth's 01 hixsolleo
Itesoked by the Smote OW? 1/lunar Ili llepresetdotires Ihr United Mors of dim-rim
Congret4 ossenthied (1w-thirds of raeh Moor coneorriny therein), Tim( the fol. lowing anise Is Proposed its1110 Constitution of the Pulled Slates, which shall be valid to nil intents nod ptlrpos&' tot n part of the Constitution when nditied by the legislatures of I hree4ourtlis of the several Slates:
"Anritim
"SPA-1111 1. In	of line removal of the President from office, or of his death
or resignation, the Vice President Ann 'swine President for the unexpired portion of the then current term.
"Ste. 2. If the President shall declare in writing that he is 1 111610 to dischargo the powers mut duties of his offiee, such powers and ditties shrill he diseharged by the Vice President its Ming 1/Mtitteld.
"tire. a. It the President does not so sit'eltlre, the Vine President, if sntisfied of the President's innbility, and upon npprovnl in willing of n majority of the heads of executive departments who not members of the President's Cabinet, sloth ills• charge the powers and duties of the office its Acting President.
"Ste. 4. Whenever the President declares in writing that his inability is ter-niinnted, the President shall forthwith diseharge (ho powers nod duties of his office.
"Ste. IS. This nrticle shell be inoperative mdess it shall have been ratified its no amendment to the Constitution by the legislatures of lime-fourths of the severed States within seven years from the date of its submission."
111.1. Res. 211.%. &Sib Vont, 1 51 'Awl
301NT RESOLVTIOX PrepkvIns amcostosonl to flue Constitution of tho ?oiled Stales railing to Ilso
insbiltly of the rr.<4.1ent to .11schArto the rowers owl dot les of his opine
Rotolred by Me Snook and !low elf Repretrentatires of Me (hilted Stntes of America Conerm assembled (iito-Mints of roch !louse (wintering Ihrrein). Thal tho following article is proposed its nn amendment to the Constitution of tho United States,
INAltILITY	3
which Anil be valid to all intents Mal pisrposes its part of the Constitution when ratified by MO legislatures of three-fourths of Ilse several Slates:
"Mulct.% —
"8uvrioN I. That In ease Of the removal of the President from office, or of his dlrelli, or resioation, the Vice President shall become President.
"Ste, 2. If Ow President mmomwes Hutt he Is nimble to discharge the powers and duties of his office, retell powers and doilies shall devolve upon Ilhe Vico President.
"Sse. :I. Winnower the Vivo President or the person next in the line of succession Io the Presisienev is solisliell that tbo Preshient, or the person lieu diseharging the powers nod duties of sold ellIce, os the vane may be, is unable to diseharge said powers and ditties, such person shrill convene both llonses of the Congress and misname that the powers and dillies of 11w office have devolved upon him.
'SE.% ,I. If the powers Mud duties of the President devolve upon nny person pursuant In seelions 2 and 3 of this resolution, line exercise of surds powers and dillies shall be resumed bv tho President upon the President's autumn N'Inent of
Ills nbilitv and Intention thereupon	resume.
"Sce. h. This article shad be inmwrativo unless it shall have been ratified as soh amendsoent to the Censlinilion by the legislatures of three-fourths of the several Slides within 80%141 years from Ilse date of its submission."
•	• • • fa • I • I • • • • • • • • ON • • lb
!IL It, (.510, s.Mh	INI t'nnJ
lilt	r‘lablIsh n c0000lvlon fo ileIrroolor Ilse moublIni of n 11'01400 nr true aiding an Irtredent to
Ischato, I ',onus nod doilies of the Mice of PrivIdcot
Ile it enacted toy itte Senate and lions( of Representatives of the lInitett Stales of
I owlet, in t'onnress assembled, Thal chapter I of title :1 of the United States Code
is 1111100141 on follows:
(t) Arid, id the end of the analysis of such chapter, Ilse following:
"21. I'm:4,1(111W 11014111y ConnnissItm."
(2) Add, immediately following the present text, the following new section:
"4 21. Preshlenthd !nobility Conunisslon
"(a) For the purpose of determining the inability of the President to discharge I he powers and duties of the Oillee of President, within the meaning of section 19 of thin title, there is hereby established a commission to lw known 118 the Presiden-lintstability Commission thereinafter celled Me 'Commission').
"	The Commimion shall he composed cx ultimo of ten 1110111bOrn as follows:
" 1 The Viet* President shall serve as Chairman of Ilse. Commission, but if by reason of death, resignation, removal from °Mee, inability or failure to qualify, there in no Vice President, or if the Vice President, shall be acting los President, the hislividisal next in line of succession to the powers and duties of the 001co of President, as determined by section III of this title, shall serve as such Chairman. The Chairman shall have no vote in the proceedings of the Commission.
" 2 The Chief Jsistlee of the United Stales.
'nip senior Associate Jscitico of the Supreme Court of the Roiled Stater.
" 41 The Speaker of the House of "Re wesentatives, but if smelt Speaker shall b Iho C 'airman of the Commission, the tender in the House of Iteprownlativers o:' the political party having the greatest number of Members of the House of 1 teen Mien t atives.
"(6) Tho leader in tiro House of Representatives of the political party having the second greatest ntsmber of Nfernbers of the House of Representatives.
"(6) The lender in the Senate of the political party having the greatest number of Alembers of the Senate.
"(7) The leader in the Senate of the political party having the second greatest
number of Members of the Senate.
" 8) The Secretary of State.
" 0) The Secretary of the Treasury.
" (0) The Attorney (leneral
" c) Seven members of (ho Commission shall constitute a quorum. The con-
currence In writing of at. least six members shall be required for any action to be
taken, or any determination made, by the Cornsnission.
4	PH103	'INAIIILITY
"(d) Members of the Commissfoo shall serve AR such WIttiditt compensation: but (hey shillf be releibursed for travel, subsistence, nod other necessary expenses Worrell by them hi the performance of the duties vested in the Commission.
"(e) tf, lu the iminion Of the President, he Is unable to discharge the powers mid duties of the 011ice of President, he shall so notify the Chairman of the Commis-slim by Written communicatioo. (Sown receipt of nii.v such comm unication, or upon receipt of a coinfounleatton from am-three members of the Coniiiiisstoo stating that they have sufficient rause to behove that the President is unable to petrol in the vowers and ditties of the Office of President, the Chairman shall convene the commission without delay.
'f(f) The Commission shall seek eonnielent medleal advice ns to the condition of the President and Ids ability to discharge the vowels mid duties of his (Om if, based upon such findings, the Com-intssion shall determine that the President is nimble to discharge the !Rovers atilt duties of the ()Mee of President, such powers
and duties shall thereupon devolve union the Individual next	line of siteeession
to the Presidency, as determined leIrsonill to section 19 of this title.
"(g) if, in the opinion of the President, be is able at any time to reassume lhr powers And &Hies of the "Mice of President, he shall so notify the Chairman of the Commission by written communication. Ppon receipt of any such communication, the Cludrioan shall convene the Commission without delay and the Commission shall obtain competent medical adylee as In the condition of the President nod his ability to discharge the powers awl duties of his 011Ice. If, based upon such advice, the Commission shall determine that the disability has been removed, and that the President is able to revs nine the powers and duties of the Mee of President, it shall notify the President and the then acting President of its decision by written communication, and the President shall then reassume the powers and duties of the Office of President.
"(11) Whenever any individual is acting as President, or has acted ns President, pursuant to the provisions of section 19 of this title, the word 'President,' as used in this section, shall be deemed to refer to that individual and the word `Presidency', as used in this section, shall be deemed to mean the powers and duties of the Office of President."
The CHAIRMAN. Tin' committee will bo in order.
Vi'e are pleased to have with us this morning the Attorney General.
.\ Ir. Attorney General, you may proceed.
STATEMENT OF HON. HERBERT BROWNELL, JR., ATTORNEY GENERAL OF THE UNITED STATES, ACCOMPANIED BY HON. WAL-LIAM P. ROGERS, DEPUTY ATTORNEY GENERAL OF THE UNITED STATES
Mr. BnowsEu.. Mr. Chairman, members of the ciumnittee, the problem of inability of a President to discharge the powers and duties of his office in case of illness or other unexpected emergency has been of serious concern to our Nation for many years. Recently both the exeeutive and legislative branches of our (Imminent have been giving intensive consideration to the clarification and improvement of our constitutional system relating to such inability.
At the direction of President Eisenhower, hich was originally
given some One ago, I believe in January 1050,	t have been con-
ducting a special study of this problem and am prepared this morning, in response to the invitation from this subcommittee, to present a plan approved by him. He has authorized me to say that  in his opiniont action to amend the Constitution is required to eliminate uncertainty and to provide for the orderly conduct of government in time of future crises due to a President's inability to act. I am also authorized to say for hint that the plan which I will present this morning provides a workable and equitable solution which lie recommends for favorable consideration by the Congress.
PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY
Before	text of the proposed constitutional amendment,
I will describe its principal provisions.
A major provision of the plan is to make it abundantly clear; that, in the event of a President's inability, the Vice President would serve only as Acting President, and only diing the continuation of the Presidential inability, and the President would resume the exercise of the powers find duties of his office es soon as he was again able to net.
The phoi Maketprovision for two types of sit tuitions which involve Presidential inability:
The first is: If a President should become unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office and so declare that hi writing, then the Vico President would become Acting President for the period of inability. Whenever the President is again able to act, he could so declare and he would thereupon resume. the powers and duties of his office.
It is my opinion that this provision, standing by itself, would probably take care of most cases of Presidential inability; but. I realize a second typo of situation might arise in the event-
-TIM COAIRMAN. Do you mind being interrupted, or do you prefer to conclude your statement, first?
Mr. BriowtIm. I will suit your convenience on that, NIr.Chairman. It, might be well for me to go attend rued present my prepared statement, but whatever you want to do is perfectly all right.
The CliAlitMAN. In the case of President Oarfield, I wonder whether he was in a position to state in writing whether he was disabled.
Mr. Bnowxtbk. As we will come to it a little later, there werelimes during that. convalescent period when he wouldn't have been able to do that. But, as I say, there is a second type of situation which might arise in the event that a President, is unable or unwilling to declare his inability, so that the plan provides for such ease, and says that the Vice President, if he is satisfied of the President's inability, and upon approval in writing of the majority of the heads of the executive departments, who are members of the President's Cabinet., shall discharge the powers and duties of the office as Acting President.
Now,
this, you will note, is not for action by the Cabinet atone, but action by the Vice President upon approval, in writing, of the maiorit of (lie members of the Cabinet..
May I ask who initiates it. there—the President or the Vice President?
Mr. BnowNELL. It could be either one. I will come to it a little later.
Whenever the President in this case again becomes able to discharge the powers and duties of his office, ho may reassume them by declaring in writing that his inability has terminated; and if we want to go to the extreme, ultimate case, where a President- might endeavor to act, idthousli clearly unable to do so, I believe the present constitutional provisions for impeachment, could be relied upon and appear to be adequate.
Now, just one other preliminary observation, and that is this: That, this plan, oven if it receives prompt and favorable consideration by the Congress, probably would not become effective during the second term of President .Eisenhower because, as we all know after congressional approval, it has to be submitted to the various States for consideration and action.
00832-57--2
6	PtiEsinENTIAL
The riimusiAx. Mr. Attorney General, doesn't this arise from the emergency of the President's illness?
Let's We facts. There is nothing personal about the matter, but
don't think the matter would have been presented so pointedly to the Nation, and I don't think the ('resident likewise would have raised the question and we certainly might not hove aeon. witit kills we have, for n considerable period of time were it not for the double illness of the President and In order to cope with that emergency.
Now, if we are going to have a 'copstitntionnl flI11011(111101t, as you indicate, then we rice not eovering, shall I say, the present emergency because of the illness of the President-, and why should we wait?
Mr. linowxmr.. Well, I will come to that in some detail as we go along. As a mat t cc of feet, .1 have a whole section of this prepared statement in which I deal Ivith that subject; but I would not agree that there is any present emergeney, in any real sense--
Mr. KEATING. NIr. Chairman.
Mr. Ilnowxiar,. That calls for action, and I would stress, rather, we must lake the long-range viewpoint on 'this for the best interests Of our country in future crises.
That is the way I would like to have us look at it.
Mr. KrAirixo. Mr. Chairman.
The CHAIRMAN. 1 only stress the point lint this question might not have conic up at all were it not. for the illness of the President.
While an emergency is not a pleasant thing to contemplate, we are—let's face the forts—presented with a degree—let's put it (lint way—of an emergency, and that is why I think I got actually interested in this matter.
Mr. Ksvrixa. Mr. Chairman, I don't agree we are faced With any emergency and my interest in this question arose long before the illness of President 14:isenhower. I didn't have tiny bill in,-brit I have been interested Thirds subject. for years and I think we would make a great mistake if we tried to legislate here simply for any one President or any one situation. We must look at this objectively, as something which is going to stand for years and must stand the test of years.
1 hove made the suggestion—and I will be glad if the Attorney General could comment on it during (lie course of his testimony—that we proceed by a two-pronged attack on this problem.
Most students feel,-1 think, that a law is sufficient, hilt a great many students of the problem have indicated also that they thought a consitutional amendment is necessary; and the constitutional amendment is the procedure Advocated by the Attorney General.
I see no objection—I ant not sure there is precedent for it, but I see no objection—to our legislating mid at the sante time starting a constitutional amendment through the process, which would, as the Attorney General has said, take a good many years; but in suggesting that I do not in any way mean to imply that there is any reason for any hurry in this matter. I don't think that exists, and I don't think that this committee should legislate with that thought in mind.
The CHAMMAX. Of course, this committee has been proceeding at a very leisurely pace on-this matter.'. There has been no hurry. We have been wrestling with it since 1955. There has been no attempt to hurry it.
I want:to say also, when I am speaking of the statute or the constitutional amendment, this is not. Just to cover the present situation, but. it is for the future also.
PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY	7
I think that the present situation exacerbates this lack of specificity on the port of the founding fathers in reference to article II, section 1, clause 0.
I think we ought to jtitiip into the bi‘each and Oct, although not hastily, but net in a way that will meet, the present conditions as Weil as future conditions.
I um not married to any particular plan, but I think we should act, and net expeditiously.
A constitutional .fitnenditient would tnke probably 2 to 4 years or, at best, probably 3 years. Some legislatures meet biannually, and
the longer we wait, the longer we postpone the decision, and the'	less
likelihood there will be am' action.
I simply use this difficulty tinder which we are now laboring as n moms to propel this thing to, shill! I say, quicker fruition.
Mr. Wournu. I think it is a very unfortunate thing that the President's physical condition should he associated with this legislation.
This is not. a new proposal. It. has been suggested many years ago. Nobody ever went toile limit, but. this is not. a new proposal.
Mr.13nowlxv.m. I thank the - Congressman for that statement because I believe it, to be true, and I think This subrommittee deserves a great. appreciation for the .fact they are seriously considering this really as a part of renlizing we live in an atomic age. The Government is making all sorts of plans for the orderly continuation of Government in the event of emergency. We have all of our relocation program and a number of other statutes that are being considered, and anyone who thoughtfully considers the realities of the atomic age must realize that the solution of this problem, of continuation of orderly government in the event a President. is unable to act, is no longer to be considered as an exercise in theoretical constitutional law, but it is a practical problem of government. which must be met, and without undue delay.
Now, with those preliminary remarks, Mr. Chairman, I would like to come to the text of the proposed joint resolution for amendment to the Constitution which I am presenting for your consideration today. I will read the exact language, if I may, Etna it is:
Resolved by The Senate and House of Representatives of She United Stales in Congress (two-thirds of eaeh Howe concurring therein), That in lieu of so much of paragraph 6 of section 1 of article II of the Constitution of the United States as relates to the powers and duties of the Presidential office devolving on the Vice President in the case of the removal of the President from office, or of his death, resignation, or inability to discharge the powers and duties of the said office, the following article is proposed as an amendment to the Constitution, which shall be valid to all intents and purposes as Tart of the Constitution when ratified by the legislatures of three-fourths of the States:
"JOINT RESOLUTION Proposing an amendment to the Constitution of the Untied States rekstIng
to cases where the President is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office
"Atrrict.a --
"Secnox 1. In case of the removal of the President from office, or of his death or resignation, the Vice President shall become President for the unexpired port ion of the then current term.
"Sac. 2."—
and now we come to inability—
"It the President shall declare in writing that he is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office, such powers and duties shall be discharged- by the Vice President as Acting President.
8	PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY
"SEc. 3. II the President does not so declare, the Vice President, if satisfied of the President's inability,
and upon approval in writing of a majority of the heads of executive departments who are members of the President's Cabinet, shall discharge the powers and duties of the office as Acting President.
"SEC. 4. WheneVer' the President declares in writing that his inability is terminated, the President shall forthwith discharge the powers and duties of his office.
"Ssc. 5. This article shall be inoperative unless it shall have been ratified as an amendment to the Constitution by the legislatures of three-fourths of the several States within seven years from the date of its submission."
The CHAIRMAN. In section 3 you have the question raised in the first instance by the Vice President, with the approval of the Cabinet. In other words, the Vice President. raises the question, with the
approval	
Mr. BROWNELL. Not necessarily, Mr. Chairman.
It might be better for me to go through with my description of my thoughts on the plan. I am sure it will answer these questions as we go along, if that is agreeable to you.
The UllAIRSIAN. All right.
Mr. BROWNELL. First, I would note that this text would be substituted for part of paragraph 0 of section 1 of article II of the present Constitution, and I think in order to have our problem clearly in mind I had better read that paragraph 6, section 1 of article II hi the present Constitution. The part that is underlined here in the text is the part that would be eliminated and the new text that I read would be substituted for it. The part. that would be superseded reads as follows:
In case of the removal of the President from office, or of his death, resignation, or inability to discharge the powers and duties of the said office, the same shall devolve on the Vice President, * * *
Tho balance of this present provision would stay in, and that reads:
* * * and the Congress may by law provide for the case of removal, death resignation, or inability, both of the President and Vice President, declaring what office shall then act as President, and such officer shall act accordingly, until the disability be removed, or a President shall be elected.
Mr. WALTER. Ma'r I ask a question at that point?
Mr. BROWNELL. Yes.
Mr. WALTER. How would you enforce section 4?
Mr. BROWNELL. That would be by declaration in writing by the
President.
Now,this morning	
•	Mr. KEATING. May I just raise a question about section 3?
Mr. BROWNELL. Yes, sir.
Mr. KEATING. The words "the President's Cabinet" are not found
in other laws, I believe. I could be mistaken.
Mr. BROWNELL. There are a whole series of laws passed by the Con-
gress establishing the heads of the executive departments, and we
have taken this phrase verbatim from .that series of laws.
There are .10 now, asyou know; heads of executive departments
who are members of the President's Cabinet.
Mr. KEATING. 'In other words does "head of an executive depart
meat" apply only to a department which is established as such .by
Congress?
BliOwNELL. That is correct.
Mr. KEATINO. In other Words—
PRNSIBENTIAL INABILITY	• 9
Mr. BROWNELL. Just here in the past few years you have established the Department of health, Education, and Welfare, and that became the 10th executive department the head of which is a member of the President's Cabinet.
Mr. KEATING. Is a head of an executive department ever not in the President's Cabinet?
Could that happen?
Mr. BnowNELL. I suppose it could happen if the President: desired to have it so, but there have been 165 years of •history uniformly adopting the Cabinet as being the heads of the executive departments, who are recognized by the Congress as the heads of the executive departments.
Mr. KEATING. This seems to leave a measure of control In the President as to whether or not they are members Of the Cabinet. Would it be objectionable to just say "heads of executive departments" without, using that phrase "who are members of the • Pvsident's Cabinet"?
Offhand opinion would be that the President shMr. Rnowxm. I don't believe you would want to do that. My
ould have a certain
flexibility there.
Mr. KEATING. My point is: Such an agency as, let's say, the Reconstruction Finance Corporation. and some of The other alphabetical agencies are not executive departments.
Mr. BROWNELL. None of them is recognized by Congress as such, ns heads of executive departments; no.
Mr. KEATING. I am a little hesitant about the use of the word in a constitutional amendment since it does not Appear in other laws. That is why I am asking the questions.
Mr. BROWNELL. I think you have a good point there, and that certainly was our thought in putting 'the phrase, which is so well recognized by the Congress over a period of years, that is, "heads of executive departments who are members of the President's Cabinet."
The CHAIRMAN. We now have 10,don't we?
Mr. BROWNELL. Ten; that is Correct.
Now, this morning I would like to divide my statement into three parts:
First is a statement as to reasons why action in. this matter is needed; 
Second is a statement of reasons why a constitutional amendment rather than a statute is needed; and
Third is a statement of reasons why the proposed plan is preferable, seems preferable to us, to any othof proposals that have been made up to date.
First why is action needed at all? •	„ It is because there is now no' agreement concerning the stains' and tenure of a Vicp:President .during theinab1110` 01' the 'President. There are yeaketed students of the Coristitntion who havethat the Vice President, would merely,*act as President fOr the duration of the inability, and there are Other-'respeiittd attidentSetthe Constitution who have 'argued that.1 he' Vice 'PreSident wonld'aetnally become President and replace the disabled President for 'the rehiehider
pf the term.	•
This denionstrates, in itsetthe'dangef,	"Of having thb right: to exer-
cise executive power :beclouded ihy itinbieiitY;aild'eonfuSiok and II
think	kepi history *pia ilitnit fate 'Mt al: I	tti
10	PRESIDENTIAL MAMMY
It was soon after President William Henry Harrison di&I in 1841 that Senator William Allen of 'Ohio objected to the establishment, of the precedent of the Vice President becoming President, upon the death of the President. because he could see that,precedent would complicate the situation in the futiire when a President became disabled and, as he indicated, a study of the records of the constitutional convention shows that a Vice President was not intended to become President, under the succession clause. The succession clause Caine about in this way, and I think historically it is interesting: When the original draft, of the constitutional convention was sent to the Committee on Style, it contained two separate clauses dealing with Presidential succession. One provided that. the Vice President should exercise those Presidentialpowers and duties and the other empowered the Congress to designate an officer to act, as President in certain contingencies, and each of these two clauses was modified by a clause which would liMit the tenure of the Acting President. to the duration of the disability.
Then, as I say, it went to the Committee on Style which, of course, had no authority to alter substantive provisions, but merely to- put them in clear and concise langunge; and what they did is what resulted in the ambiguity. They consolidated these two provisions into one and introduced the phraseology: "the same shall devolve on the Vice President."
The committee used this limiting. clause "until the disability be removed" only once instead of twice, instead of using it to modify each of the preceding clauses separately, and they changed the semicolon to a comma so that the clause would hen part of a continuous sentence and modify each of the preceding clauses, and this brought, about dm ambiguity.
So, the records of 'the constitutional- convention, it seems clear, vitiate the argunient that the presidential(Ace devolves on then VicePresident, who, thereby becomes President for the reinniiiiler of the term. lint, regardless of the inteill.of the framers of the Constitution, remember that _seven Vico Presidents 'have, upon the -death of the President, been recognized as having become- the do lure President and, as a result of these precedents established whenever a President, has died, it -Seeing to be assumed without question that 'the Vice President would become President and does not merely act as such when; the President, dies.
I believe that was Dankl Welister's view at the time of r President Harrison's .death--=in other words,- that Vice - President. ,John Tyler actually becaine President.. This, of course—thiS precedent; iif the case of the death ofthe President—is what, makes' it easier to argue that a Vice President supersedes ,the President' whenever he exorcism the
Presidential power, whether on	or-otherwise.
The .CHAIRMAN. May I add a little bit of history there, too, to that idea and go (drifter. When bills wernseht, to Tyler they were noted sent in the Acting President and, very angrily, we are told, ho struck out the word "Milne and insisted upon his being consideredd as President, mu, that word "Acting" vas stricken out, quite a number of tunes on the Signing' of anumber of bilk
Mr. BnowNsiz, )Y01174 struck that out with his, pen,- he caused
a large part of the problem )vo. are	discutising this morning.
As We will note 'both in 66'010414nd the'Wilion eases, tho Vice
PresidenCwaS not asked to act as President largely because of 'The
PH) BIDENTIAL INABILITY	11
fear that he would hecomo President and would thereby oust for-the remainder of the term (ho incapacitated incumbent. As Asa result, the full extent, of tho disability was carefully guarded in both of these cases because of personal loyalty to the disabled President---and, moro important., the public interest, could not help suffering from having no active President in both of-those cases.
-I would remind you President. Outfield lingered on for 80 days after he was shot on 'July 2, and during this period he performed only ono official act—the signing of an extratlititepaper. Alt hough his mind Was clear during Melina days of his invnliihsini he was unconscious end it was reported that he suffered from hi-Alumni &Ms during the last days of his illness; and he was physically unable to'discherge the duties of his Office dining a substantial part of that 80-day period.
I don't think it, could seriously be contended there was no important businem during (lint time because history shows that officers were unable to perform their duties because the President was unable to commission them, and at that thin) there was a serious crisis in our foreign affairs. Yet, tho department heads transacted only such routine business as could be transacted without. the PresidenN supervision, and it was claimed that important questions of public policy which could be decided only by the President Were simply ignored.
Another important factor here is that public opinion was sharply divided about the manner in which the public bliSilleSS was being handled—a rather serious thing for a time of crisis.
\tr. KKATING. 'MO is true today, too.
Mr. Bilowximi.. I iniugino that is right, Congressman.
The CumumAN. it p011118 up, too, in view of (ho times in which we live, the need for certain action to cover the situation today.
Mr. BuowNnik. Yes. That is--
The CHAIRMAN. During the dine of Barfield we had that difficulty as you pointed out, end our records show even more difficulties, which are all the more reason for action, now--
Mr. BuowNzia.. I agree with-that,.,Mr. Chairman.
The.011AIHMAN. And, that we should MA wait, to have a constitutional amendment. adopted.
133IowNEL1.. That was the point I was trying to make to Congressman Keating, of course. _ IVhile it is true public 01)1111011 is always divided about how public business is transacted, in,lime of need and national crisis it, is important to minimize that to he extent we can do so; and I believe we can do so by settling this problem now.
Mr. KnATINO. In fiErtheranec of what the, Chairman 'has said-1 feel strongly on this: That, while I have felt a low was sufficient and a constitutional amendment. was not necessary, Ill become convinced to the contrary, that,. the 'constitutioita +intendment is necemay, don't think that this committei, should'simPly pass a law, if the judg-MOilt, of the committee is that CORFU ill in lona] amendment is neeessory, just because of speed. I think that is a secondary consideration, and 1 think—
Mr. Buowimk I am glad to hear you say that, and I hope In ----Mr. INA,TiNo. We should Put the einpilaSIS upon doing the thing right. at this limo.
rho CHAIRMAN. I think the reason why we Would have to have a constitutional ainendinent, if at pll1 is because of tho suggestions that have.been made concerning inability of C011111118810118 or the Cabinet
12	PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY
en, some such similar group to bo constituted to raise the question of inability niid to solve that situation.
' There is nn express admonition in the ConStitidkni that hi-the event of the inability of the President the duties shall devolve upon the Vice President. 'He must take over. Ho has no choke in the matter. Therefore, there can be no interposition of any kind of agency or group or 'commission which would have the discretionary power to say whether he can or cannot take over because this is a solid, straight, uninhibited command to the Vice President. to take over, and there can be no other agency.
So, if you are going to have any cominission or any group determine that, you must have a constitutional amendment.
My point of View is: We don't need the constitiitiThial amendment because we don't need the commission. I think 'the Congress has ample reserve powers by article 1, section 8, which gives the Congress power to make all necessary and proper laws for carrying into execution all the powers under the Constitution. I think under that. power Congress can act, and for that. reason, and for the other reasons I have indicated I think a situ joie law is all that is necessary.
Mr. KEATIt4o. Mr. Chairman, my point is this: I know that, you advocate alloWing the Vice President to say When 'the President. is disabled and to take over, and' I have respect, for your viewpoint in that'regard., end I would muchrather accept, that. than nothing at. all, but the main thing is to do something, in my judgment.. The method is a secondary matter.
I have felt, a commission was the best method. The President. and Atterney General have advocated members of the Cabinet. i do not necessarily agree.
I think it, was Professor Corwin of Princeton who said: "If anyone intervenes, there must be a constitutional amendment."
I lean with yen that any of these methods can be done by law, but my point is this: Whatever method we select as best, whether thati is to be done by law or constitutional amendment, should not be a controlling factor.. It-should be a very minor factor.
If we decide to interpose the. Cabinet as the best or have a commission as the best method, and that requires a constitutional amendment., we should not be deterred in that by the. fact it is going to take 2 or 3'or 4'years to get it through.
•	Mr. Baahrxru. I agree.
Mr. ICEAtINO. We should not lean toward a method which favors a law'ovet a constitutional amendment, unless we feel that is the best Method.
Nowj am very much open-minded on the approach to the method. I, naturally, like the authorof anything, think' that lily own suggestion
ml ht'	mote-merit than someone else's, but I 'am very ready to yield on that to the 'necessity of action, and in That action we must decide this'qhestiOn not upon any specific situation, but with complete objectivity.
Mr. BROWNELL. I agree with that.
Mr.'Wmirint. Did-the -Attorney General, by any chance, see the committee repcitt which this subcohimlttee issued on the 26th of March Obtaining' an AtilllySiWof the r4plies to the questionnaire which
waS'seht tOlhe authOritien in this field?	•
' Mr. lift0WkELL. I sail' last year's report. • I haven't seen this.
PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY	13
Mr. WAINER. This is new,:d I respectfully suggest that you examine B on page 03. You wll find many of the authorities? including Professor Corwin, as Mr. Keating just mentioned, agreeing that. legislation could meet this problem.
Mr. BROWNELL. Well, Congressman, in a moment, I am going to devote myself exclusively to that discussion, as to what method we should apply here, whether constitutional amendment or statute, and I have what I hope are some rather appealing arguments so far as we lawyers aro concerned as to why we think the constitutional method is needed; but I think before we get into that, if I may, I would like to spend just a very few more minutes on stressing the need for action because, as we know, some people have taken the position that there is no need for action. They have taken the position: "Oh, we have struggled and got by in crises for 105 years. Why do anything about it?"
I think, in order to realize the importance of this question, it is necessary for me to spend just a few more minutes in describing these historical incidents so that there can be no question in the mind of any members of this subcommittee that action is needed, and then we we will come to the question of method.
Mr. KEATINO. We are living in a different world from 165 years ago. Mr. BROWNELL. That is a fact.
The CHAIRMAN. May I just ask another question: I think you had indicated you, would look up the question of whether or not we haVe over had a situation where we offered a bill and a constitutional amendment covered the same subject at the same time. Did you have a chance to do that?
Mr. BROWNELL. Yes, and that is in my statement this morning. The CHAIRMAN. You have?
Mr. BROWNELL. Yes.
To go on with the Garfield incident, you will remember after his illness had dragged on for 60 days his physicians thought he would recover, but his convalescence was expected to take another 60 days. So, the Cabinet considered the possibility of asking Vice,President Arthur to act as President during Garfield's recuperation. All 7 Cabinet members agreed on -the desirability of having him act as President., but 4 of the 7 thoughtthat Arthur '*1 exercise Of Presidential power would actually make him President for the remainder of the-term and thereby oust Garfield from officeand it was reported that the then Attorney General Wayne MacVeagh shared these views. So, the inevitable result, which always will happen, I believe; under the present'system, was that the Cabinet decided that'Oarfield should not be advised to ask Arthur to act as President without first telling him of the possibility. Therefore, the whole matter was deferred because the physicians feared that the shock caused by such a discussion might result in the President's death. As you will recall, President Garfield died on September 20th, making it unnecessary to solve the problem in 1881, and the whole matter was dropped until-President Wilson became ill in 1919.
Mr. KEATING. Mr. Attorney General, you omitted in yourstate- ment the mention of the New York Times and the New, York Herald Tribune and 'the I3oston Evening Transcript, and I notice represeaV-atives of those papers hero and I am sure you want that included in your transcript.
14	PREAIDENTIAL INABILITY
Mr. BRowNEbb. I do. 1 thank you for that,
That was overlooked in answering some of the questions.
Mr. McCulloch. Of course, I cannot let tide occasion pass without reminding my good friend front Now York that part of America lies west of the Alleghenies.
Mr. Bnowttzrx. As a Cornhusker, I will agree with you on that, Congressman.
Now, in furtherance of this first point that, l rim' trying to make here—that notion is necessary in this matter—let's lake up the President Wilson incident.
There can ho no 'doubt, that President Wilson was actually unable to perform the duties of his office during at least, some of the period actor his collapse which stitlied on September 25, 1010, and did not end until a year and a half later at the end of his term on March 4, 1021.
As evidence of this inability, it appears that during the special session of the 66th 'Congress 28 acts became law because of dm President's failure to act on them within the requisite 1O days. The record shows he passed on only I of the 10 acts that wore presented to him between October 28 and November 18.
'rho Senate Committee on Foreign Relations repeatedly tried to got the President. to take some action or supply the committee with some information about-the Shanth-ng settlement., but the committee rooest went unanswered.
These facts aro only part, of the evidence that the President. was disabled, in fact, during a part of this time and, more important, this inability occurred when the Senate was debating the Versailles Treaty.
The exact degree of the inability is uncertain, but, I think it, is quite clear he suffered from a stroke and his loft side was paralyzed, and there is very good evidence that, he was unconscious or at least only semiconscious during a part of this illness.
Whatever Wilson's condition,Vice President Marshall and the Cabinet were not, fully advised concerning it, and the President's family and his White House staff and the Cabinet discharged public business in such manner and by such methods as they deemed appropriate.
History indicates, for example, that Mrs. Wilson and Dr. Cary T. Grayson, the President's physician, played an important part in the solution of many questions of public, policy.
Students of this period seem to agree, that official papers wore given to Mrs. Wilson, who sometimes passed' the papers on to the Secretary of the Treasury or to someone else In whom she had confidence.
Soon after Wilson's stroke the Cabinet joined with the White House staff to keep the Government operating. Secretary of State Lansing called 21 Cabinet meetings to transact executive businesSi but, as a matter of fact, these meetings wore said, to have been hold for nearly 4 months before Wilson even hoard of them.
Although Lansing's action doubtless had an effect on any congressional move that might have been made to establish tho President's, inability, you will remember that. President Wilson accused Lansing
of usurping Presidential power and forced him to resign.	•
One other footnote on the history Of that time: Patrick Mimi**, Wilson's secretary, reported that Secretary of State Lansing had suggested that, in view of the President's inability,, they-should ask the VicePresident to act as President and he quotes himself as saying:
PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY	15
You may rest assured that white Woodrow Wilson is lying in the White House oil the broad of his back 1 will not be a party to ousting MM.
'Annuity also reported that when Lansing resigned, Wilson said:
Tumulty, it is never the wrong time to spike disloyalty. When Lansing sought to oust me, I was upon my back, I am on my feet now and I will not have disloyalty about me.
Because of the belief that the Vice President would actually become President for the balance of tho term and the -President would bo ousted, asking Marshall to act as President during Wilson's inability was viewed as disloyalty. The President's friends didn't, seem to think Mit Marshall wotild remain Vice President-and merely discharge the Presidential functions during the inability. So the result was what, we would expect—that they looked at. Marshall with antagonism and viewed him as a possible usurper instead of viewing him as a person who could lighten the disabled President's burden; and, instead of asking hint to exercise the powers devolved upon him by the Constitution, they attempted to keep the Government operating in their own way in order to forestall any serious attempts to declare the President's inability.
Now; it seems to mo a study of these two cases—the Garfield and the Wilson cases —shows there is a real need for a means of supplying an active President during times of Presidential inability, and it is the belief that the Vice President actually becomes President for the balance of the term when called upon as such which has nullified, for practical effect, the constitutional provision for the administration of governinent when the President is incapacitated.
Tile CHAIRMAN. I think on that. we are all in accord, Mr. Attorney General.
Mr. McCumoon. Mr. Chairman, I would like to ask the Attorney General, if it is his studied judgment., section 4 of his proposal will nullify or neutralize all these feelings that are so eloquently set, out hero on the part. of Cabinet members and friends and appointees of any President.
Mr. DHOWNEMr. That is the principal purpose of it.; yes, sir.
Mr. McCumOdu. 'Mitt is your studied judgment--
Mr. BROWN/ILL. Yes, sir.
Mr. McCumAion. That. the loyalty which is engendered by the consideration given by a President will lie completely neutralized by section 4 of your proposal?
Mr. BnowNELL. Taken in combination with the other sections, yea, sir.
It is this problemnf Providing for Cho exercise of Presidential power during periods of inability which would not be solved merely by providing a means by which the inability could be established, for unless the ATsident and his Cabinet and his other friends and the public, I might add, are absolutely certain of the President's status after the. termination of the inability, they will tend to oppose any attempt to declare the existence of the inability, because they would view that as ft declaration which was equivalent to removing the President from oflice.
To answer Congressman McCulloch's question specifically, this problem, we believe, would be Solved by sections 2, 3, and 4 of President. Thsenhower's suggestion, which provide that the Presidential powers and duties shall be discharged by the Vice President as Acting
16	PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY
President and that the Vice President shall discharge the powers and duties of the office as Acting President, and the President could come back under section 4.
So, with this history to guide us and with the realization of new hazards, the'continhity ofgovernment due to the atomic ago, we must conclude—and I am delighted to hear the chairman say so, and I believe. it must bo the unanimous opinion of any lawyers who have studied this problem—that action is needed to solve this problem of Presidential inability.
Now it seems appropriate to turn to the important question of whether this can best be done by a constitutional amendment or by a statute.
There is no doubt that some students Of the problem have argned that a statute or concurrent resolution which declares that, the Vice President merely acts as President ad interim would be sufficient, but. there is sharp division of opinion on the question as to whether such a statute would be constitutional.
What I am endeavoring to-point out to you in this section of my argument is this: That we are not endeavoring to say who has tho better of the argument; wo are trying to eliminate the argument before it arises.
Now, to understand the basis for this division of opinion which arises—and it is a very serious one—I want to call attention to the different phraseology in the present Constitution' of the first half and the second half of paragraph 6 of section 1 of article II, which we have quoted previously. This is the way the first half reads:
In ease of the removal of the President from office, or of his death, resignation, or inability to discharge the powers and duties of the said office, the same shall devolve' on the Vice President.
Now, there is no express reference to any action by Congress. Let's look at the second half. The second half reads this way:
d tho Congressmay' by	provide for the case of removal, death,
resignation or Inability,a	both of the President and Vice President, declaring what
officer 'shall then act as President, and such officer shall act accordingly, until the disability be removed, or a President shall bo elected.
Note, as I say, that in that second half it is specified that Congress may act—and that., I think, is the basis for these arguments that are being made.
I don't ask you to agree with it or disagree With it, biit I do want to show you that sincere students of the Constitution have disagreed as to this and I don't think we can stand for that kind of disagreement
thiteof crisis when we have a chance, as we do now, to eliminate that argument, before the crisis arises.
The CminhiAi4. It shows also, in` the first instance, what action is limited. to the Vice President and, in the second, limited to the Congrees.
There is the clear indication in 'My mind that it was the Vice President who was to raise the question and the Vice President was to resolve, the question.
Frankly, it Mr. Arthur and Mr. Marshall had taken action in those dap, no question would have 'arisen today. The y could have easily said tinder the first part of that iiectiOn'l;' articleII, that they had the
poWer.te raise the question ;'they	the power to assume the duties,
PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY	17
and they did, and they were going to assume the duties. They would have been imminently sustained in that argument.
Mr. Briowromb. I agree With you Mr. Chairman, but, the point 1 am trying to make is, while you and I may think one way, there are very eminent people, whom I will cite hero in a moment, who think the other way, and as long as you have that stalemate and opinion you are not going to get any Vico President to take over; you aro not, going to get any Attorney General to advise the President, that he should tarn over the powers.
The CHAIRMAN. Oh, I agree with you on that.
Mr. BROWNELL. You are going to have critical conflict in public opinion at, the tinie, and why.shonld we risk that, when we can now settle the matter before the crisis arises?
The CHAIRMAN. I couldn't agree with you more. HistOry shows there was a reluctance on the part of Marshall and Arthur to take over. They were not usurpers. They were fearful that, they might be called usurpers.
Mr. BROWNELL. That is what. I meant to imply.
The CHAIRMAN. Therefore, it, is not the danger of the usurpation of poWer. It is the danger—
Mr. BROWNELL. They won't act.
The CHAIRMAN. They won't use the power that the Constitution gives them.
If youagree with me that, they had the right to do exactly what I indicated in those cases without a constitutional amendment., why do we need the constitutional amendment now?
Mr. BROWNELL. Because of the precedent that has been established in the long history and the Wig history that has flowed from it.
The CHAIRMAN. We can show, with the proper leadership and proper guidance of public opinion, that those actions, those precedents were wrong.
Those precedents don't necessarily bind us or bind the future Vice President who believe that Arthur and Marshall Were wrong; but surely, if you admit they had the power to do that in those cases, in 1881 and 1910, they have a right to do it now without a constitutional amendment.
Mr. BROWNELL. Let me go on with my argument., if I may, Mr. Chairman, because I think I can show you there is very respectable argument the other way. I may not, agree with it, but as long as that conflict exists I am sure you will not get the action you need in time Of crisis because nobody wants to take a chance on it; and the question of settlint that, problerrt,,as we lawyers know cannot be settled; cannot, oven 6 Started, until the crisis arises, so that' you have that period of uncertainty there which is so unfortunate.
The CHAIRMAN. Wouldn't 'that reluctance that you agreed with me was present be dissipated if Congress would simply make the de,Clara. don that, the Vice President shall in the case of the disability, as a result of the question which he raised and resolved, step in and take over the duties?
BROWNELL. Not as I see it, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN. The faetAha(Congress so stated would be enema-agernent for him to demOto`that conehrsion.
' I ain sure public opinion would determine if he was wrong. There is always the power of impeachment in case he was wrong.
18	PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY
If he was intemperate and was not taking proper action—ho would be very careful; I am sure ho would—impeachment would curb any kind of excess, any kind of usurpation.
I think this resolution would be sufficient to do away with a reluctance to RESURIO the power.
Mr. BROWNELL. I think your first pOint, 'wimps is right. It. might, give some encouragement, but. it, wouldn't. settle the problem because wo aro not dealing with a question of statutory interpretation. Even if the statute is passed, you -still have the question of its constitutionality and t some arguments would be made to that point as are being made now; and that is the reason nobody. wants to make the move. They would stir up a lot Of litigation right at the time of crisis.
Now,. if we can settle this thing once and for all, by clear-language in the Constitution, itself, then we will have surely solved the problem.
Mr. WALTER. I Would be' inclined to `agree with you, Mr. Brownell.
Mr. BROWN ELL. I would like to proceed with a case where the question of the validity of the statute would be raised.
Mr. WALTER. Who would raise that question?
Mr.-BROWNEM, I have several citations of that, as we gO along here. Would you prefer to wait until It comes in the prepared statement? Mr. WALTER. I agree with you. Unless we could visualize that., we
shouldn't worry too much about it.; 'hut I foresee cases where it, would arise.
Mr. finowNma,. Now, let me. give you the argument of the people on the side of the argument; that the Vice President. becomes President. for the balance of the term.
A few weeks after Garfield's death a man named Charles W. Jones, of Florida, asserted in the 47th Congress that inability has the same effect as death, resigoation, or removal. In all four eases ho argued the office devolves on the, ito- President who thereby becomes President, and ho argued that. if Garfield had lived and Artlitirked been forced to exorcise Presidential power during the President's recuperation, Arthur would have displaced Garfield and would have served for the remainder of the. term because, ho said, once a Vice President is seated in the Presidential chair Ito has all tho power that is given to the President, by the 'Constitution and he cannot be displaced except. by impeachment for high crimes and Misdemeanors.
Senator Jones believed,.in other words, that, a constitutional amendment would be nocessarylf a Vice President were to servo only for the duration of the President's inability and, as the Constitution now stands, ho argued, the Viee'Presidentmust serve for the remainder of the term; and ho offered three arguments in support. Of his position: First, since the Constitution makes no distinction between a vacancy and inability, a Vico President would become President in case of inability, just as he would in case of the President's death;
Second, ho argued that the vesting clause of article II excludes
tho posetbdity having	Presidents at once—one acting and the Other disabled; end
Third, ho argued that. the clause "until the disability, be removed" limits only the tenure bf an officer other than the President or The Vico President who' acts, as President by statutory designation, but it, doesn't limit the tenure of the Vico President. Let Inc cite you another example Of an argument from a sound authority in favor of the positidn that, as the Constitution new
PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY	19
stands, the Vico President could not act Merely for the duration of the inability, but would become President for the remainder of the term.
During Oarlield'a illness former Judge Abram J. Dittenhoeffer said:
I start with' this eOnclusion: That whenever the Vice President gels laWfidly into the Presidency the President gets lawfully out of it. There cannot be two lawful Presidents at the same time. Mark, no hitt to time for which' hese powers and duties "shall devolve" is fixed. It is just as absolute and limitless as if the language of the Constitution were:
"In case of the felft0Val of the President from on ice, or of his death, or resignation or inability to discharge the powers and duties of sell Aire, the Vice President shall become President."
And when the President gels lawfully nut there is no way hi which lie can get in again.
This line of argument which Dittenhoeffer used to substantiate this conclusion was much the same as that used by Senator Jones.
Another respected authelitv, Theodore 11'. Dwight, professor of eonstitustiond Ian at Columbia, took the same position.
At the tithe President Wilson went. over to the Versailles Conference, Minds ,Taylor, who was another respected constitutional lawyer, argued this way:
And here the fact should be emphasized that neither the Constitution nor the Presidential Succession Act makes any provision for a President of the United States pro tempore. After the Vice President has been sworn in as President, he becomes such in the full sense of the term. No provision is made by law muter which lie can hand back the presidential otHee to his predecessor.
Now, I don't happen to agree with this line of argument-that is offered by Messrs. 'Tones, Dittenhoeffer, Might, T ylor, and numbers of others. Although I think their arguments can 'be answered very effectively, I don't go into the merits of their arguments at this time because I want ta make this point: That a number of respected constitutional authorities have argued that there can, be no temporary devolution of presidential power on the Vice President during periods of presidential inability; and, whatever we may think of their arguments, I think that a statute would not protect the Nation adequately, for the doubts that have been raised have been raised too persistently.
As long as there is doiibt, lingering doubt, concerning the constitutionality of the statute, as long as there is a question concerning the disabled President's constitutional status after his recovery, I do not belieVe any inability, as a praCtical Matter, hoW 
ever severe it may be, would 'be recognized lest the recognition of that disability would oust the disabled President.' from office. Moreover, a presidential disability, severe and prolonged enough to warrant the devolution of presidential power on the Vice President, would (Watt) something of a crisis itself,
So, the Constitution should be clear and there should be no room for dispute about its" Meaning, for that is the very time when the country should be Milted and the very time when a Vice President should
have general support..	.
Wo miist remember that the constitutionality Of such a statute just couldn't; be tested until the inability arose, and it is the very uncertainty and Confusion at that time that we are trying to avoicl That is another reasonwhy a constitutional amendment is preferable to a statute, •even if we limit it, as the chairman suggests, to merely a
20	PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY
declaration that the Vico President is to be Acting President. and only during the period of inability.
Now, what if We go further than that, if it, is proposed to go further, and declare that some person or some group of persons ora commission, other theft the Vice President, should partieipato with him in the solution of this question or decision as to when the Vice President becomes Acting President?
For example, would we need a -conititittionol !tint:m(11mq, if my proposal is adopted, which wetildprovide that when the President is i
disabled and fails to declare his nability, the Vico President. plus a
majority of	Cabinet should declare the existence of the inability?
I agree with the chairman. I don't think this section could Mit-stitutionally be embodied 'in a 'mere statute or concurrent resolution, nor could any plait that involves the creation of en inability commission or any plait that involves thedetermination Of inability by the courts. Those would certainly have to be done by constkiltional amendment, and I think it is important to go to history for a little instruction on thisrpoiht.
At -the time of President. Oarlield's illness in 1881 the great weight of opinion favored the inter-retationi that Vice-Presi-dent -Arthur, and Ito alone, could determine that, the President. was disabled. At that time most students of the' Constitution said that the Viee President was obligated to exercise the 'powers of the Presidency during Gar-field's' illness, just. as Intieli as he was obligated to, preside over the Senate or perform any other constitutional dutY, and that no enabling action by the courts or the Congress or the Cabinet was necessary.
Since the Vice President had the duty of acting as President, it was argued, hi-curtain contingencies, his official discretion extends to the determination of whether such a contingency actually exists. In other words, they were applying the well-known rule of law that in contingent. grants of power the one'to whom the power is granted is to decide when the emergency has arisen.
The CHAIRMAN. Don't you agree with that statement?
Mr. BnowNELL. I do.
The' CHAIRMAN. If that is the case, and the COnititution vests that power in the Vice President, he is the one to whom the power is granted, and, therefore, the Vice President must decide when the contingency arises.
Mr.-1BROWNEI,L. That is right; but I think it shouldn't depend on one man's'Opinion, oven if he has a title back of his name. I think there should- be a constitutional provision which would make it so clear that, wo couldn't have this kind of debate.
Mr. KRATING. Yes; but it also seems to me—I say this with the the utmost, respect—that the chairman is getting' the cart before the horse, because it seems to me our Committee's 'ditty is first to determine the method by which we think this disability should be determined; then to 'decide, based upon that,' whether a law or constitutional amendment thadesirable approach.
Now, there probably is merit to the aigument—justleave -it to the Vico President, which more likely give warrant to a law as against a constitutional amendment—but F don't think that should be an argtunent  that respect. I think We shoUld trot determine how we are goint to do it—whether we are going to adopt, this plan or some other plan—and then determine ,whether it should bo by law or constitutional. amendment.
PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY	21
The CHAIRMAN. I agree with you. I think we want to determine, lirat, whether it should be by law or constittitional amendment.
I have come to the conclusion, after a short. delibeintien, there is some law and precedence, after reading all the history, that all that is necessary is for the Vice President to act.
This very statement that the Attorney General rend:
II fs 111 well-established tote of law that In contingent grants of power the one to 111141ii the power is granted k to deelde when the emergency has arisen—
leads 010 10 the inevitable conclusion that, since the grant of power is to the Vice President, he determines the contingency upon which he exercises the power.
Mr. MeCuti.ocii. Me. Chairman, if I would follow that conclusion one step Nigher, could I say that, in your opinion, there is no need for anything—the authority now exists, and it is only the problem of having the Vice President act when he should?
The CHAIRMAN. Legally, you are absolutely correct; but there are those doubts in the cases That we have had Illustratedl the cases of 'far:Alan and Arthur, to assume that power. Therefore, it is necessary to do away with that dotibt and resort to congressional enactment which would remove thelesitancy.
Mr. McCobtoen. Do you think The congressional enactment, of itself, would have much bar-thee on the Vice President acting?
The CHAIRMAN. I think it would.
Mr. BROWNELL. That is where - I disagree with the Chairman, because I think it is a constitutional problem rather'than a statutory problem.
The disagreement here is the interpretation of the Constitution and, while you feel one way,--I happen to feel the same way on it—suppose the whole committee or the whole Congress should feel thesame way—still it is a question of interpreting the Constitution, and there is very respected authority on theother side, and I believe it is that very disagreement which has caused the Vice President to. IteSitfttO`tO act, and that is why I favor—
Mr—Wm:exit. Is it disagreement. as'much as it is'doubt?
Mr. BROWNELL. Doubt. I think that is more accurate. Yes, sir. The CHAIRMAN. Read the next sentence, and I think that nails it down.
Mr..11nowxnu,. I believe—and this is a. personal opinion—that the COnstitritiOn now vests the power---
The CHAIRMAN. Read the one before that.. You didn't read it.
Mr. BROWNELL. All right. As the Cornititntion now stands
The	-No. 'Thus the Vice President is constituted"—
Mr. BROWNELL. Oh, yes. I have it. now. I lost my place there forr-a minute.
Thus the Vice President. is constituted the-judge of the President's inability.
As the Constittition now stands, it. mentions only the successor, and thus makes him the judge of the' facts.
I believe the Constitution now .vests the poiyer of determining inability in the Vice President and 'that. the Vice President could not constitutionally be 'divested of this. power without a constitutional amendment.
That is the argument on My side only.
22	PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY
would point nut here—what l would like to do now is to show—that if the President's plan, which involves both the Vice President and the Cabinet partiopating in (his decision, should be adopted, a constitutional 11111011(1'116a would have to be passed.
I callio your attention' the fact that the Cabinet, has always notified the Vice President when a President has died. I think it should-also notify hint in an analogous situation of the President's 'inability; but, at the present time that is only custom that regnires the Cabinet to notify the Vice President in case of the President's death, and the notification adds nothing to the Vice- President's'exigling powers. In other words, the succession clause, as it now stands, self-executing,and the Presidential -poWers devolve on the Vice President without this notification tinder' the Constitution.
1 think, as a practical matter, that a Vice President, would not. undertake the exercise of Presidential power during the period of Presidential inability without first comintling the Cabinet.; but, under the Constitution, as I say, as' it is now, he could do so.
Section 3 of the proposal I firitniaking this morning would make it mandatory for the Vice_ President_ to consult the Cabinet and to secure the approval of a Majority of (lint. body. In this sense our proposal limits the authority which the Constitution now vests the Vice President, Mid that is the reason I think it is quite clear, mid I believe we would nil agree that a constitutional amendment would be necessary to carry it into effect.
Mr. KEATING'. Mir. Attorney General, before you proceed to No. 3, would .4)11 please turn back to your wording of the present. Constitution, on page 4 Of your statement?
Mr. BROWNELL.
Mr. KEATING. There is a reference to what Congress may by law provide for—
Mr. BilowsELL. Yes.
Mr. KEATING. And it says:
* * * the Congress may by law provide for the case of removal, death, resignation., or Inability, both of the President and Vice President, declaring what officer shall then act—
and so on.
Is it your interpretation of that constitutional Provision that the extent to Which Congress may by law prOvide for the inability has relation only to declaring who shall act in the line of succession and goes no farther than' that.?
Mr. BROWNELL. That is correct.
Mr. KmAmo. So, that even though it says Congress may by law
provide for the inability	
Mr. nnowxgm... That- is when both the Vice President and the President are out.
Mr. KEATING. Oh, I see. That applies only in the ease where they are both out?
Mr. linowximb. That, is correct.
Mr. KEvrixo. All right.
Muhl you also. before yoy proceed to the advocacy of your speeific proposal, comment at. this time On the suggestion made that the Congress proceed not by a law, but. by constitutional amendment?
Mr. BROWNELL. would be g, lad to comment on that now because it, seems to me the more you consider the situation the more you
PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY	23
realize it is a constitutional debate that is involved hero and (list the statute would not settle the constitutional debate.
The atithorities that we have discussed here this morning, very respectable on both sides, are inking about the interpretation of the present Constitution, and the question would merely be—suppose the statute were passed—whether the statute is constitutional tiniter that. canto provision in the Conslittition. So, you do not eliminate the debate by passing the statute. You still lave this conflict of opinion, rind the conflict of opinion, I think history shows usi is what has made the Vice -President so hesitant to act, to the point where the Vice President. just lies not acted oven though you had a serious crisis of a year and a half, as in the case of President Wilson's illness.
Mr. REATINo. Counsel of our committee has called my attention to titti Interesting fact that in the first: 21 amendments to the Constitution they became effective in from 1 to 4 years. The 22(1 took 4 years. The first 21 took less, than 4 years.
I think you have made a very convincing argument for n constitutional amendment.
Mr. WALTER. Actually, the average time is something less then 3 years. You have to' remember the first 10 itMendiltPDts -were adopted at 1 time, but: the average time is something less than 3 years.
Mr. BRowNEt.h. It would seem now, if it is agreeable with you, Mr. Chairman, we might discuss first why action 13 needed---I think we are in general agreement on that—and then discuss secondly why the constitutional amendthent seems to be preferable to the statute, and I believe,—I have I am not overstating it when - I say—there is general agreement on that; hut let us get to the specific provisions of the plan which I would like to have you consider, and I speak here on behalf of President Eisenhower, who has endorsed this plan and asked the Congress to give it, early and favorable consideration.
Section 1 of this plan merely confirms the present generally accepted interpretation of the Constitution—that in ease of removal of the President from office, or his death or resignation, the Vice President shall become President for the unexpired portion of the then current term.
In other words this specifically affirms the result that has been accepted by the Nation at least seven times in cases where the President has died. There is no controversy about that.
It seems wise to have it specifically stated in the Constitution rather than a matter of usage.
Now we come to the questions of Presidential inability. There are two kinds, you will remember, we are asking the subcommittee to consider.
Section 2 states that if a President voluntarily declares in writing that he is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office, such powers and duties shall be discharged by the Vice President as Acting President.
This section authorizes the-President to announce his own inability and allows him to do so, knowing that his powers and duties would be restored to hiM when he recovers.
The provision is also made that this announcement shall be in writing, for the obvious reason you don't want to have any dispute as to whether or not he did it, and the existence of a written document would serve that purpose.
24	PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY
Tito CHAIRMAN. SUppose he Were a prisoner Of war, out of the countryi and ho wouldn't be able to write?
NIr. -	Then I think he would have to come under
section 3; but 1 1hitrk it is important in our thinking to remember that most eases would undoubtedly ho solved under this section 2.
For example, where tho President, if lie is gOing'	hospital and
knows he is going to bo out in a few days, entail make this %%Atte!) slaleinent, that would lake'enre or it, and he would know when his convalescence was complete he could -come back into .oflico, and that
would 'give- assuraneenot only to'	hot Witte pidle.
It would be an easy, sensible wiry of 'dealing with-this problem. %Ir. Fitton.. Mr. Attorney (loners!, what would he the depository, for that statement?
Mr. nuowNELL. I assume under the existing practice,- it %mild be the Office of the Secretary of Slate, where all such official documents nro filed.
As a matter of fact, the only objection-I have heard to this section No. 2 is flint it- might open the door 10 a President shirking his duties and responsibilities; but. I think' the obvious answer to that is any President who used this section to shirk his duties would he breaking, his oath of office.
Mr. McCouocii. And, of course, that action would be contrary to all history.
Mr. Ilnowstax. All history. 'There is not, the slightest, bit of evidence that would happen.
So I think we could pats over that rather captious objection and come now to section 3, which is designed, at least to take care of the most imuSual situation which might, happen, and because it might happen, should be Heald h with. -This is the'efitie WIRTo the President is unable or Omitting to declare his own inability.
In other words, this is the section that would be applicable in Case tho President were unconscious or,- in the ease of 'the point raised by the chairman itMoment ago, captured by the enemy in (line of war, something of that sort.
You can't describe all the various events that might constitute inability, but in'these cases: that wo arc talking about, the plan calls for the Vice President, with the approval of a majority of the President's Cabinet, to make the decision.
•	Before considering this provision, I think, however, we should look
at some of the alternatives that have been proposed.
The CHAIRMAN. Mr. Attorney Oeneral, I think you ore very wise
in refraining from defining "inability."
Mr. 13aowxm. Thank von, sir.
I think a dose study of. the question would make it quite clear in
a Constitution we shouldn't go into that much detail.
Mr. WALTER. I think the word is defined so welt in all the courts
that it would serve to meet any situation.
Mr. nnowNEtb. Yes; I agree wide that, Congressman.
Mr. KEATING. It is not a matter of law.
Mr. llitowximt,. That is right,.
Lot's turn to a plan that would Involve.thv Courts. 'Phis alternative
proposal, which we reject, arose (Wink Oarlield!sillness. Theodore
Dwight. tit that time said that the Presidential inability. was a judicial
question, and, therefore, should be determined in the courts.
PRESIDBNTIAL INABILITY	25
Now, in the past the theory of justiciability, if You choose to call it that, has [Mind support among some Menabers of'C'ongress,
For example, on several occasions bills have been 1111teidtINA to give the Supreme Court original jurisdiction to determine the President's inability; butof course, we start with the proposition that a constitutional amendment would be necessary if this type of solution were to be adopted for these reasons, which I am sure will be clearly evident io the members of this committee:
.the Supreme Court has already ruled that its original jurisdielain is limitedto that set forth in the Constitution and cannot be enlarged by statute;
Second, no Federal court can inquire, on its own motion, into the action of the legislative or executive branches; and
Third, it Is donlitfidlliat the courts could be given statutory authority to'fiiid a President disabled in an action for mandamus, directing the Vice President to act as President, because the discretionary authority is involved.
Mr. FOLEY. Mr. Attorney Clenera I, at. that point, are you acquainted with the recommendation of Professor Crosskey?
Mr. IlnowNtta,. Yes.
Mr. Fohmv. Where he suggested perhaps you or your office might initiate quo wartatito proceedings?
Mr. BROWNELL. I used to- have a good many -arguments with Professor Crosskey when he and I were members of the Yale Law Review together, and I think I would continue that argument. on this subject. if I saw him again.
Now, then, to say that the courts do not, now have equity jurisdiction to pass on a President's alleged inability does not mean that the courtAtnight not pass on this question, antihero now we come to Congressman Walter's inquiry. Once the Vice President has exer-
cised Presidential powe	individual
it is possible I think, that the issue might.
be properly raised in a ease involving 	rights.
For example, one who is prosecuted :under. a law signed by an Acting President might question the validity of 'the haw on the ground that the President was not actually disabled and that: the purported law, therefore, was improperly signed.
To give you another example, a litigant might attack the legality of an executive action, alleging that the President ‘11.1a incapacitated at the time he took the action.
In such cases, it is conceivable that the courts might. decide the question otCvhel her or not a President is disabled.
1 am inclined to think that, as the Constitution now stands, the courts would decide the Constitution submits this question to the Vice President's judgment. alone, and that they were bound' by his decision.
There would also be the question of whether the courts would look beyond the prestimPtibit of regularity of official action.
If this proposal sub:Witted by methis morning were adopted, I believe the courts would accept the finding of the Vice President., and a majority of the Cabinet, as final; nevertheless, I do think these examples indicate that the question might. ariselnethe courts: and, as I said before, to say that the courts now- don't. have jurisdiction to pass on a President's alleged inability isn't. to say they couldn't be given it by a constitutional amendment.
'0011900 owinti .99.41) of 003.0.0 iTtd0; '10)!ss!unuoj 091 0.0)J09 siott)t)
io) su'Ulaismid J0 Suouttim :.-101)09100.) Jo quitoaou JoiludsA‘ou 1111.0 .011 ism Mans lug; 0Aoliog om 4,10A00,101N, *.lamod 101i001)!SUd 081,120x0
0) 111411 1001J 0111 oA1111 111110M 0110 00 110p1M S01.11111 8181.10 111111010
-11,10A0310 01 1111803 11110 'SINS% 110,O)	'SS111 JOJ 00 Sup pinoo 41)10,1J0
out I ‘001sepotto.) 0 JO 80!11.% imu 0.110!pu11 !mu idni,ohni put) silo!) -te4twoma1 Po" 'vista.) Jo owl) 4,911!uoinlin Jul aoAod 0,41010.mo Jo o810.lax0
1.9 S9019)00).)	si pan ittogi011,1, Sautalowa JO 0(U)) lU 00!)010
0101110111011 1110A0.01 p1110.11 9.91m 0,09),).01.01	111.91(11110,) U imp 180
Al pos1.1110111! 1111008	osou.)09 000110 0s0111 10)04,),1 0.11 iSoomos.
•J1.09) 0,910) 101011apisom 09) opu,1301) ploom 11 )10111i 109 iS1109) iuuosaml )0110.119m11 091_0) litow NO tut situuutt! -notxo luitom putt wit:Still mos .103 uois!00.01 1900.0 Sitio Lou 10(1) os
-potwatto,) 101.11 110101119. pp) ' su .103 Og S1010.100 0.9110 0:610.990;0m 010 0) ritiptuoutop .01 Nom onoiu 1101111111) 1.10 11018811010100 0111 010 8111111100p 111(11811011103.1) JO .10S11111) 0111 81 0,10111 11Min80.1d itrilint OM tialtim ..tai 010 091 111 SplullOsuu 11000 001s811110100 0111 J! uo.m 'Romp liu
10 11!11 vs0.1(111 0) .10,O011 010 110p41101110,) 0111s011 tl OSIS 1111110m vp1) put)
9)111.01 s81110) su pp)	S 110(1811w popISO.la	S111,101 0) 8)1010100
'T O "HUM' gi101114MIUxo 11111011,1 11110	10,11480,W ( SUNS 00)
.1.10011101011 pool 1001J01 Ils!volso UI $1) 0)	111! 0) -
'1.0)001 0) 019 purtOm
soovuo.! JO a090100 U .103 010111 1mp0r0.1 om 1101 '0)4011) 110,101118000 OM
*nolKliMikuh) Vfill Jo 010A 49)4PIP1)."1 .10
Si!,140111	Sill!q(01 110 Jo 0000101x0	0,1010,9) you 'mum 00000x0
10)0.00,1010 10,90sql) 011100100 01 10014100Ad 01) 0,401),),1 imu 0001.90Stid
"°101.010 0) Ihmomothuo 0(1 ploom qa!qm uotst410100)0 moods U JO 09910004k) 09)„.103 po.)03it) 11009 omui ‘0auttistui .10) 'suollsoAlin0 10.1aAos
•sinuatni .091090 III) 0041 1)0)00103 1010 8(101)140;tins .009)0 iudi,mos 1)0301400w 0,11 .J001! Souolow0,1,1 011) no imooliou0,10110,110 0(1 plow%
10.41,)01) polo! 011; u!	iudpil,00•1 11) 11.0011)9 0.0.1111,10x0 oto 01110)00
slup1110 .1119.0010 putt '1110114.14 11110011019S11oo MEW 01 111111oult1111114 08 tO 110111.0.1 18.1oM001 0)0,1111108 JO 019.11.09) onil 010109s 1900,0 .1491)09
101,96! 091 imiuut 01 110110.111 amluispoi o1j1 110.%0 'Sus ohm	11.010.01
011) 'Aupo910 1)11111001.00.10.‘01) oil) 30 9.100.01 ominoox0 0111
11! )(‘01	;mu ,1010111 0,41 'wax.) 110 sit S1919001 JO Itom1.ui0.91
18.111 mu ow 0A011011 0.11 0000,),111 111	1-oi0.40	01)000.1 .101110 01,1,
.1).0010.9) Os "l'IRNAM.11t1
4901,4018.101)1111 Jo 0;0111401,8111111.1 5! Will, To:1,RO )1 Mix .1001) 10i.)0(0,1 OM Slim 110800.1 ,1.011000 811,11 0,1011,1, 'SniNINOIII IMO WII)(11141.11119,14)11.011.10,11111110.1 IMMO NM 0) ithipu Snintoa 1011 0,10 '1.1‘011q 0,0. 011 '0)01) 01 1111 1011 0,10 ippim '814000 .010 JO so.041000.01 011111011M "S0il,)11,101110 101109011 JO 0111!) (11 111(1401101!
SR111.),018.3	0) 110010.)8 11 1)1111. 11,11(1$111 s1 .1110p180.141 11 000 ..I-111010.1111 tc1C0011 1111 1110111)10,1,1 0111118s0 01 11141180.1(1 0;)14% 0111 01‘0111i. 1)11100s
111 '0o1.-lloli111)110.1 110 100111 0) 00001 0191x09)	19110904 1101114111101140
01 lug) 0.001.0).01 .0.110 imi) %mop(' 0,0 1;011) 19 001000,1 1m0,h10,
'1009!1 solltlud 100101 :1111A1019 0000 a 0! )109nni
30 SiipituA 09) uo 010.1 01 00110 pail%) 09 Sjilloolovtios 101.`00 Aulintu
100!)1P11	111910111 19 1)01009.91.0141 011.0 a1m( .10 1,100.1	Ipkt!..1
:V11M4110.1 00,111). 81108000 08010 .10J 11 polo010,1
*1A 1)1111 '81.11111.).01)	p.011111,101op 09 1)11111.0.0. S111110111 9,1110VISOM 0111
11.119.0.0. .101001 11(11: II noploimop JO '.1)111(11S800l .)11111 pOloptslio,1 OM
	As1,1'1111VNI '11/1,1,Nti(111341141	OZ
o.tu	Jon) loads 0) opium!. tit	J! ‘.)suol lu dspuotai tquoinsoJa
ott) lug; s! mom! 0) Juum 0) 21.110g s! S.!pma still 19 gp0qAtut
.ituu util putt 'ouop oq pittoge 0111) IOU .10 .totpotim oppop.0) lit9oi 0!
uo!uldo	1111 .101J11 ‘0131100.0(11 paptivuoa um!) kmul! p) oiqutqApu 09
pinom 1! lull!) OM Sttm tiosuo4.111110111ppu ttu s! liu!) puu 'toll! 0) juSui
Jq	ptutt
oi patt!loul 11(111 `Ai mw $
a01 Stupti,ta.) oat A'
-011,1, •14101/1110.1(1 ill)) JO 01/410101 11111013.10(1 Sllauttl1).t0 0.11J A0111 14111 1 011.11 81 11 11111111 1 '1101 1141110110,3 011 1 0) 0) SpuSorisotOpi puu )sopto.lif .ttotil lull) 00 '(10!)uipsit0o 01)) .toptut Pomo 8)11 Jo eopup tuft ut.tokhul A:ovum 111m oil lull) paw° JO 41110 OIL) MN) 041110 0011 011A), AIJOIVAJA0 108.1110.1 Jo "l'IMNIA1011 a '01 N1 .V0118)J11 09 0) 'S)1US01 luttotuatl u ‘S..)1uSol V omo Soto '1 110(1 -plop!vo,1,1 041 Sq pop90(1(10 o,tom
Sotp stow!, optuos 01)) JO ittostio..) puu oa!Apu	,),1991)0.) Sotm,
•	ittoplso3,1 oil)	poitilochlu 0.10 Sott)	.NVIX111.1.y110 0111
'0 1 11(1014 0111 30 111010100 1011U Uglinpu	"11,iNMautli %qv
.08,1110o 30 'ploppo3,1, ot!) Sq poitquildu tun pupplo oq)	mot!
-won: :8111) 0) .tomutiu Attoat lo4,0)	Ion! pptom 1 •nvlvtt.IVlt,) 01L1,
1091 solua!ptil 0000.) ttotint puu piduatio oil)
#11(1,0111 ttl	Splk1111)..ti0 o.kolloil	inq
'0o.quutippso0.ott(d 0) 0.1omsuu pip 0) 2191)..to).)u '110101100oAlluipttuttl)
ot!) kui lot! Sum tto.c 01 .litspuoso.td. um	')(tint '011.10,1t .101110 11! '014
'g)1.1911.1111 0111 JO 211111:1A% Ii) luoo.uldu alp tuluplo putt 1011190,) 091 Ilutitio.) oil lug) plattio.tutoo.t 11 p tioputt
11	1119 'eo0111pol111.).qo 011 1 00111111 '0.1110 WU I '0)) 111114M A11.11011111,10 011
11011A op pptom oil '00 lit1101) It! 'jut)) sSus Sitio)!	.oil !qoits '1100.1)).19
I wog.% ‘11topi0o3,1 03),1 01)) 191 ttolspop oil voupptioo twit! spu,
•Sa(1.1) It oa .111) 0) 0).10(103 sso.t(1 knuos %tom! ow! 0.101) qflitolopt '000(10.1(1 .)011 14101) 11)1)0 0141,1119) ovou9pltu0_01 in!!! ppum qapim '011010 1011pluo 091 .103
sUIVI '110,404 1 00 1110111'	.11139900.1,1 1111)11) 1 nriwitout! %01v
omolo% 0,..1.),v0111100tm mop
-!so.11I 11119 .1011111.1 0,J.1A.0011 11101)100.1d 40101.103 )11111111110(1X0 1114 0.111 '110111)100 ROD 1103.1110 011A1 0110 S1110 0111 01101
411 1119 `110110410/110	optuu (111$11 '.10.1.001 I 111011100.111 .1011100J Jo pup
Rlooxo,!.Coiwilu Aquiumolop %Hp vu 101111111,J tytio190.).1,1 II JO itopaolos
0111 ponpvtu! (110(1) J0 anon Tipp	Ilithili0h)O.1 tit)! 1(11).1 0111.111l JO '00.111111
-11010011b .1110 0) 0011(100 JO J0111111111 11 100.11.1.10.1 .14St 'Ny11111 11110 01)J,
'1011 0)
0190 81 i11o1900.id 01)) .1011)0tim 00110 111 01011)1 01 110!)!,0(1 11 ill p1111.410(
ati) 110 0.1091 :Wm	iduppo 09) ',1.1.5,o.).t0ul 'putt—Sqlpluti! JO ixolo.ld
oil) no .toAtoil:1714(1,111011 itio1900.111 0.)!A 01)), JO u0lisott.1)	09 pplom
0.101p `pJou (1110011 Hp)) Aim!, .11101.kp guppot1 Ju )IlilRl ot1)110 win ma.)
18)10) 111—o,uluploo.pt	)(1181001000.10) *9H	ittopltint.id o.9A 011),t1)0%
yuulu gl)()11 81111 .10. ,t101i8001) V	..C1141.11.1 18101110 8011°11180M ,0111 81 •11
•Spoq 0.)11100x011011 -	.1.11Ju	•.1')!159011! 0,111%1900m
11,11uyillottp til	0.9,11/4 0111,1111Ak 14101(1 ioitta!mpto of S11111
.10(104(1.09101 )0 1100;) 09) pull— srptoplvo.1,1 otp JO J1)111011 110 V,1111,10111 tip)) 100000(11 pup 0014 mil pup.- om9)0(1 119011 mil 0) .1e1011 011100 1 100110 011100(1(10 011 1 O11111 1101111 00.u11.mo.ul 110110)011 putt S.141111141111 01u•Ituluto 111111 ))IIU, '101..90.111 011 1111101111 A011) IMO ‘,991x011 09 plump; 00.111p.mo.R1 09) pup o,u91,)(1 10ti 01101.108 onuti 111;11tt! )1110 1)1100110 01111101) oluo.t.) %Opium) 019 1 .'1‘11!:!ili.:
LZ
28	PRESIDENTIAL INAI3ILITY
thoroughly convinced that this' is it	move; otherwise, you would
have division and'elnios in tho country.
So, that is Ono l'ellSOn WO think that is an asset to this particular phut—that here would ho agral)
silo would be considered, if you will:m*1%1mila of the Prost( ent, and, after they have deliberated MI it and thought it Was OM 'wise thing to do, front a• politic policy standpoint, it would hum I believe—the decision would have—grent publin neceptanee which, of course, is OS:441(thl to the success of the plan.
'rho CumnstAN, Their loyalty and personal feelings to the Chief might cause thein'to net the other Way.
think ice had that made clearly manifest in the ease of the 1Vilson Cabinet, They refused to come to Any sueli-----
11r.	llut the reason they dielliat, I believe, Ale.
Chairman, wits ignite clearly because they were uneertnin ns to
whether tho President could	buck into &HIV at the end of his
disability, and that is the reason this plan removes that obsinele and says right at the beginning, before tho thing luippens, the inhitite the h`OSiti011t is 111/10 to act again, ho conies Wk.
With that kind of situation, it seems quite cloAr	1110 there would
be no bar to the N'ieo President or the Cabinet 'tusking this decision, and they could ho dear in their conscience, they worn doing it only for the temponity period and that 'the will of the people that the President, if he is It tin (Win% should net could'he effectuated.
The CHAIRMAN. Human nature being what' it is, first you have loyalty to thin Chid, oral secondly, which is very important, there may ensue loss of jobs—heads may be chopped oil if the President comes back; they may no longer he members of the Cabinet--and think that is An important factor to be considered.
Mr. illnowm.3,1„. Assuming the vice president acted
,tou would'love so ma
The C1 1.1111M.1\. I II AV(' HO refeNliee, Of MONO, to present meinbers of the present Cabinet.
Mr. iluowximi.. No. No present. personalities should be considered in connection With this whole question; but if that should happen, you would have the safeguard right in article V, that tho President., if he Was tilOPO, could act mid come back by It written deelaration, and you would have, of course, the ultimate protection of the impeach-mow promilm.,0, which would he applicable case the Acting l'reshlenl Was acting Arbitrarily.
The CHAIRMAN. That is whore you cover ii?
Mr. Ilnowxy.i.L. Yes.
The CHAIRMAN. Biltif he doesn't recover, as in the case of Oarlield, they would no longer he members of tho Cabinet—and it is a nice
13noww,1.. At times.	. .
The CHAIRMAN. And they would resolve any doubts they had in
favor of their Chief, 1 would think. Let's be'practical about. it..
Mr. I3nowNE1,1,. -On -a temporary basis, i beliove-that would be a
groundless fear, Mr. Chairman.	-
Mr. McCui,Locu. Mr. Chairman; I share some of your kart* in this field, and I think that is one of the major decisions that this committee must first, molve.
I think the experience of Secretary Lansing is one that must give anyone pause, regardless of section 4.
PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY	29,
NIr. llitowNEtb. Then I evidently haven't gotten My- point across, because my point is that history indicates, to me at least, quite clearly that the reason for this stalemate, for the Endure to net, was because of the uncertainty as to whether the President could ever,eoine hack.
If I am correct in that) mid we thrIllge the Conatitution in the manner]. propose, you would eliminate Una obstacle entirely, and you would have- them noting only for tin, duration of the innbility.
Mr. Kt:Am./it, Mr. Attorney Oeueral,' the chairman, with whom must say last venr 1 was rather inclined to be in agreeniefiti would leave it entirety to the Viee President -to 'Mike this determination. One reason for my reluctance to accept that is that I can Sell a danger there because he provides for the President reassuming his'Presideney,
i
if he a able to do so, the datiger of a chaotic condition by having the Vivo President say the President was unable anti the next day the President saying, "I am nide," and then the Vice President, the next day saying he is tmble, so that, you would have a day-by-day President.
Now, to a lesser degree, it strikes me dint danger is inherent in this
Mroposal whielrleaves it to' the Vice -President and Cabinet, If the ivo President and the Cabinet decided' to gang up'on. the President, they might any, "Ile is unable." and then the next day, under your - proposal, he-could-say, "I-am able to-eel,"- and unless he fired-the members of the Cabinet, I hey would then the next, day say he was unable.
Thou has been. one reason why I have leaned toward the feeling that it would be better to have the Cabinet alinre in the decision, but not to have it absolutely conclusive, but to .fillow the other branches of the Government to have a voice in reaching that decision.
Would yoii coinment on that?
Is that a fear which you don't think is serious—that there could he a chribtie- situation resulting front this plan?
N1•, BROWNELL,	almost.
I would be inclined to think it would be  nonexistent, for this reason: 'Phut public opinion is going to decide this matter in the ultimate analysis.
No Vice President can make' thiS decision unless he (eels OW the country is with him, Congress is with him, and that public opinion is with him. If he does so,'In! deal ro3's himself forever. As a matter of fact,-even if he niakes a mistake in hindsight; he is destroyed forever.
So this decision is going to be very deliberately made, and it is going to be made with the advice of the President's °Mehl' fitmily, so that it, will be a serious deeision„ and I would, think the Vice President,
realking that' the Constittition	he takes his oath of office
to support the Constitution—he is only in there on an acting basis. for a temporary period, Oven after ho got in, would act, wisely and with duo regard to 11114: otherwise, he W011111 destroy himself hi the lield of nubile opinion and hia whole life, official life, would certainly beiteopardized, if not destroyed.
' I	is a very poWerful factor, perhaps the most powerful of all the
factors that-come into play here.
Mr. WiturEn. Mir. 15rowitell, have you given any thought to the advisability of having the President, when he feels he is able to art again, submit his ease itt-the Cabinet?
Mr. IlnowNELL. We have,' to answer your question directly, yes, given consideration to that. We had A discussion of that, and we felt
SO	FRESH) NTIAL INAMLITY
that the 'people of the el:ninny would not feellitlite- (he Mine about the President; coining buck as they do about. the President going Vitt. They elected the President., After all, They want him in-there. They are witting to- theist hint to make this decision. So CS for as his coming back into office is concerned, we felt. there should be do strings on it, at,all;Alitit is what' the people voted for, and that is what they want.
That only leaves the question, as I See it, of the eNteeale sitnaiion where a President, obviously unable to net, still deterMined to do so, and in a reckless sitifatiOn of that kind, or one where lie really was not able to make a rationing derision, if' the tint of erlSiii.was such (het action was needed, you could bring in youelinponehineni proceeding,
IVALTEn. There is the other ease where the Acting President
‘veuld.Conchirle that he was going to reinoin— ---
Mr. IlitowNm,h. Yes.
Wmanit. And would refuse to wept the President's repre-
sentation he is now Mile to carry
Mr. IlitowNati.. Then that is another-reason why you wont the
President	to be able to Make the decloration under section .1. Mr. li'moimx. Mr. Chairman?
'rho OnAtuNtAx. Yes.
Mr. INtonAN. no you not feel flint if the President. declared his inability: anal subsequently felt. he was able, he probably would be in very secluded circumstances? In that ease I wonder how this public opinion 'of which you speak would be permitted to function.
Mr. linowmitid. Of course, this would ell be a Miler of public
record, and 'whops the attention of the entire-	Nation would, of
course, be focused onse that I don'tithink any aspect. of it would be not in full public view if I 'Understand your question.
Mr. PluOirAm. I am thinking of the, most likely, secluded situation in Which the President would find hiMself.
Mr. 13nowNum.. Yes.
Mr. VriceilA N. There may be some minimum degree of hospitoliza-tion,- perhaps.
Mr. linowistotb. Just. place it. in the context of present-day life, where you have your television and your press conferences and oll, so' that it, wouldn't be very long, if any mistake was made, before the people would find out about, it and action would be forced. Now, someone asked me, Mr. Chairman—
Mr. Attorney General, this committee has a bill which is going to be considered very shortly. So we will ask you to conclude as Soon us possible.
fir, l3ttotivx>.t,t,. I-could finish In & minutes, if you wish.
Someone asked me the-question of how this would work, who would initiate the action,: whether it. would be the Vice President. or the Cabinet. I would -like to comment, on flint.
The Cabinet, under one set of circumstances, could notify the Vice President when a majority of that body believed that the President's inability was sufficient to warrant a devolution of the Presidential power on the Vice President,.
There is an Miele*, there. The Cabinet has always notified the Vico President When a President has died, and section 3 would extend this custom in the' case of inability.
PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY	31
On the oilier hand, the Vice President. could make the decision to assume Presidential_ tower, but the constitutional validity of his decision would'tkinend (Mon the Cabinet's approving that decision.
So, it could be initiated either Way.
There is also the epSSibility that under section 3, the Vice President
could take the	willroitt. The Cabinet first inviting him to
make the decision. Unlike the present provision of the Constitiition, however, this plan, section 3, would require approval of a majority of the Cabinet before the Vice President could undertake the exercise of Presidential -power.
Now, section 3 contains a safeguard against. the Vice President's possible usurpation of power on a pretext of inability. A Vice President who undlirtakes the exercise hi other words,-ot this Prosi-dentialpower, wonittbe assured that his action could not be seriously branded as-usurpatio', because it would be -approved hi advance by a majority of the President's own appointees in the Cabinet.
In 'addition to the safeguard providedby section 3, as one of you brought out n moinetirago, section 4 contains a 'second safeguard because it provides that 'Whenever the Presidentdechires in writing that his inability is terminated, the President shall immediately resume the exercise of-the powers -and -duties of-his-office.
So, I think section 4 provides a disabled President with a constitutional guaranty that. the disabled President. can regain the powers of his ofIke without. the concurrence of any other official or -any other group; but more important than anything else is the point that I con-
clude with;	'mentioned a moment gigolo Congressman Keat-
ing: More important. Olin any of the written safeguards are' those provided -by our political processes, for ultimately the operation of any constitutional nriangement depends on 'publicOpinion, and upon the public's possessing a certain sense of constitutional morality.
In the absence of this sense of constitutional morality on the part of Abe citizenry, there can be, of course, no guaranty against the usurpation of power or any coup- d'etat. In other words, no mechanical or pmeedural solution will provide a- complete answer, if one assum es hypothetical Cases in which most of the parties are rogues and in which no sense of constitutional propriety exists.
Section 5 is merely the mechanical provision for 7 years for ratification by the States.
I would conclude my remarks this morning both by thanking the chairman and the members of this subcommittee for their courteous attention, and expressing My firm belief that the plan presented to you has the essential ingredients to make any decision Calder it a just one, and gnerally i:icceptable to•ourpeople, for history mid common-
sense combine to tell us	this problem should be solved to protect
our Nation in time of future crisis.
Mr. KEATING, Mr. Chairman, may I make this comment: I have,as the Attorney General knows, offered a legislative suggestion, which is now II. R. 0510, calling for a Presidential :Inability Commission to make the determination of inability. I have been very much impressed with the arguments advanced by the Attorney General on behalf of himself and-the President., and my mind is very open on the way wo should approach this problem.
My one decision is that it should be approached. I feel the commission 'plan is the best approach still, but I would be very much
32	PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY
inclined to prefer, in the absence"of any suggestion at all, the suggestion made by the Attorney .General or, indeed; the suggestion made by the chairman- or any other of a reasonable nature to solve this problem,
in order that the Attorney General's views of the President's proposal may be before us in tnugible'form, I should be Itakiy to akin offer in the "House the proposal made now by the Attorney General.
Mr. Ilnowsp,m, Thank you very hutch.
The CitAtIntAN. I think we will have committee prints embodying all proposals that have been suggested.
I want to say we are very grateful to you, Mr. Attorney General, and Mr.- Rogers. Your presentation has been very enlightening and very helpful-0 this-conilnittee. It has been I would say, on a very high planeottait has been exceedingly constructive, and, I am sure, will help the members come to some coneinsien.
I find in my study of the matter there is no 'perfect answer to this, that every answer has its iMperfeetlonsi and what we lutist try to do is to reach the least objectionable solution.
Mr. KEATING. 1 want to add something else, Mr. Chairman.
Into CHAIRMAN. Let me say, first, before I forget it, I want, to ,put in-the record the statement-of -them
committee on the Federal Constitution of the New York State-Bar Association on' this Matter, and an editorial that, Appeared in theWashington Post this morning entitled "Displacing Ill -Presidents."
(The matter referred to was ordered to be printed in the record, as follows*
lion. EMANUEL. CELLEH, Committee on the Judiciary,
House of Representahm, Washington, D. C.
PEAtt Mn, Gm En: As you know, 'the committee. on the Pederal Constitution of the New York Nieto liar Association has Studied the question- of Presidential inability for some months and has given consideration to the many suggestions made to the Judiciary Subcommittee on the subject.
As a result it is felt by this eenunittee that a, constitutional amendment is necessary, and that the nmenciment should provid in substance:
(al That the commencement and termination of any	should determined by such method as Congress should by law providai and
al In ease of the inability of the President, that the ice President should succeed only to the powers and duties of the office mid MU to the office itself. It fselear that In its present forM the fifth clause of section I of article II of the Constitution leaves open the matter of determination of what constitutes
and falls to authorise anyone to deal either with the beginning or the end of the disability. This fact has boon a matter of embarrastment to the Government in the past and could be a matter of national disaster iti-tho future.
The question of what happens on the death of a' President and whether the Vice President then succeeds to the office or succeeds only to the powers and (Julio of the office has been settled by historical tradition. As we all know the Vice ['resident is sworn in as President upon the death of the latter. Presumably the same thing would happen in ease of the resignation of the President or of his removal from office.
On the other hand, it is not clear whether in ease of Presidential inability the Vice President would become President or would only be authorized to act as President as one succeeding to-ther powers had duties of the (Ape. The words "the same" have never been construed In this connettleen dud this fact adds to the confusion which is so apparent in'the recent discussions on the subject.
14 is extremely doubtful whether Congress has power to deal with the matter without R eonsilltitional amendment and clearly the ambiguity of the present provisions cannot he cured by net of ConAress alone.
NEW YORK STATK BAR ASSOCIATION,
COMMIIVEN 05 FEDERAt. CoNRTMITION,
March 29, 1951.
PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY	33
Our committee concludes that, n constitutional amendment is necessary for any final or authoritative solution of the problem and therefore recommends for %:tut consideratkin thatThe fifth clause of section 1 of article 11 of the Constitu-lion shoUld be amended to read as follows:
"In Case of the RenieVal of the President from Office, or of his Death Or Resignation; the said Office shell devolve on the Vice President. In Case of the Inability of the President to discharge the Powers and Duties of the said Office, the said Powers and Duties shall devolve on the Vice President, until the Disability be removed, The CongresS may by law provide tot the Case of Removal, Death, Resignation Or Inability, both of the President atid-Viee President, declaring what Officer shall then be President, or in Case of Inability act as President, and such Officer shall be or act as President accordingly, until President shall be elected, or, in Case of 'nobility, until the Disability shalt ixt earlier removed. The commencement and termination of any Inability shall be determined by such method as Congress shell by law provide."
If this amendment shall be adopted it, would mean that in ease of the death, resignation, or removal from office of the President, the Vice President, would bo sworn in as President. In ease of the President's inability, however, the Vice President Would only net as President, !toying his powers and duties, until the disability. -was .remeved. Congress would be called upon to enact legislation determitling the method by which the commencement and termination of any inability should be determined,
In view of the amnia of tittle that Would necessarily pass before adoption of the amendment there would be plenty of time for your committee to consider what method should be adopted by Congress for this !determination.
•	In ease of the inability of both the President and Vice President tho change contained in the amendment proposed above is designed to make it plain that rho officer who shall then act as President shall do so on a temporary basis until the disability is removed or a President elected.
It is believed that no amendment, want ! be sufficient to meet the problem without providing. for the determination of the question of commencement and termination of Viability of the President or the Vice President, or without separating the provisions relating to inability front those relating to death, resignation, or removal, thus removing the ambiguity involved in the present language,
I sincerely hope that the foregoing Will be, of assistance to you and your committee in your consideration of this vital subject, and I am enclosing additional copies of this letter for the other members 'of the subcommittee, and am sending further copies to the committee's general counsel.
Respectfully and sincerely yours,
CORNELIUS W. MOE ERsti AM, Chairman.
.0=MIIIIMM.10=M
irrom the Washington Post, April I, 10571
DISPLACING ILI. PRESIDENTS
Beverly Smith, Jr., Washington editor of the Saturday Evening Post, takes us
to task- in a letter published on this page today for casting doubt on the efficacy of his proposed Presidential Powers Commission. In his recent article in that
magazine, Mr. Smith offered his plan under the title of "Smith's Two Cents
Worth," lint now he has substantially raised his price and urges its accoptalnee as a means of plucking the flower of national safety out of the nettle of danger.
We fail to see any such promise in the proposed Presidential Powers Commission.
That body—somewhat similar to the Presidential Inability Commission in Representative Keating's bill—would bo composed of three members of the Supreme Court, the Secretaries of State and Treasury, the majority and minority leaders. of the Senate, and the Speaker and minority leader of the House. Any time it might find the President temporarily unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office it could install the Vice President as acting President. When and if the commission should find the President's disability removed, it could restore his powers to hint.
In displacg the President the commission would have to act, by: a two-thirds vote. Would it also take two-thirds of the commission to restore the President to his office? If so, 4 of the fl members, all of whom might be of the opposite political party, could prevent a recovered President front regaining the office to which the people had elected him.
Other grave cptestions must be asked about the proposed PPC. For instance, would the Chairman, who would be the Chief Justice, be the only perm who
34	PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY
could call it in session in case of a presidential illness? Any Chief Justice would be most. reluctant to intervene in the affairs of the President. Mr. SMitb seems
to assume that such a Commission would have relieved President Wilson of his
duties and powers during his illness. Wo seriously doubt that Chief Justice White would have initiated such a course of action, and if a Commission had attempted tii'displace Wilson In the tense atmosphere of the tight over the League
of Nations he would certainly have resisted with all his power. An appalling fight over the Presidency might have been the result.
In our opinion, the best. prospect of relieving the Nation's plight in that. situation would have been a clearly established rule that the Vice President could fill in temporarily without acceding tOlhe presidential office. Mr. Smith may be right In assuming that Wilson would not have invited the Vico President to take over in any event, but there is oven less probability that he would have bowed to a Commission's edict without a potentially perilous Struggle.
The existence of such n Commission would be a constant source of irritation to any President. Every time a Democratic President might be temporarily ill or might haVe to undergo en operation, a Republican Speaker or leader in the Senate could badger the Chief Justice about summoning the Presidential Powers Commission. The Chief Justice would be accused of acting or failing to act out of partisan motives. ()no of the most serious objections to the whole scheme Is that it would plunge the Supreme Court into political imbroglios.
In sum, the proposed PPC would raise more doubt and uncertainty that. It would remove about national leadership in case of disability on the part of the President. For that reason it is dangerous. A much safer proposal on this subject is the one favored by President-Eisenhower--which would permit the Vice President to act as a substitute for the President at the latter's request. We are glad to note that Mr. Smith also favors this plan even though he thinks it does not go far enough. Mr. Eisenhower's additional plan of having the Cabinet decide the disability issue when the President himself could not is provoking about as much controversy as the Commission Idea has done.
Mr. KEATINO. Imight say, parenthetiCally, I understand that this committee of the New York State Bar Association doesn't agree with anybody on this problem, Which Is par for this course; but I do Want to add this, Mr. Attorney General, and this is an encomititn of the  chairman; in light Of this statement that this has been lteld"on such a high level; I want to call your attentiOn to the fact that this committee sat. and heard a large volume of evidence on this subject last. year, toward the end of the session, and the chairman agreed with
those of us on our side that. it: was an inappropriate and indelicate .
time to bring up that subjeetat that time, and any political advantage which he or his Party might have derived from it was completely divorced from his mind, and we agreed together that we would take it up in a very serious way in this session.
I want to say I commend the chairman most highly for that attitude.
Mr. BROWNELL, I would like to add my appreciation to that.
Mr. WAurIR. I think this indicates the quandry of the members of this subcommittee, because we have been wrestling with this thing since 1955, and I think all of us have the same views that we had when we initially undertook a soliition.
Mr. BROWNELL. It is a hard problem, but this subcommittee can handle it., I am sure.
ThOCHAIRMAN. Have you seen this brochure the committee issued on the Presidential disability?
Mr. Bli0WrszELL. We have. 'We just received one this morning, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Bhooxs. Mr. Chairman.
The CHAIRMAN. Yes.
Mr. BROOKS. Mr. Attorney General, on page 21 of your testimony you indicated that you believed that to allow the judicial or legis-
PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY	35
lativo officers. to make the initial determination would be violative of the, ConstitUtion,' or would not be. constitutional. ,,;Do you ;think that is true hi light of your restatement on page 12 of the second part of paragraph 0, where it states very clearly in the Constitution that "the Congress may by law provide for the case of -removal, death, resignation, or inability, both of the President and Vice President"?
Mr. BilowNEI.b. I have two comments on that. First, that point that you just mentioned, that is a case specifically where the Constitution says in case both the President and the Vice President aro out, there-can be a succession law by statute.
The `question we are raising is on the first part of that 'section which does not mention Congress acting, but I do not intend to say the Constitution could not • be amended to provide • that type,nf situation where Congress or the judiciary might participate in this decision. •
Of emirs°, you could have a constitutional amendment, but my point there was rather to the policy involved.
We have always endeavored to maintain this strict separationn-of powers between the three branches, and this seems to be peculiarly an executive-branch decision..
Mr. BROOKS. Then'you don't think it would actually be unconstitutional for congressional officers to participate in such a decision?
Mr. BROWNELL. I think the Constitution could be amended to provide that.
The CHAIRMAN. Aro there any other questions?
Thank you, Mr. Attorney General.
(WhereUpon1 at 11:48 a. m., the'hearing was adjourned, subject to call of the Chair.)
(The following was later submitted for the record:)
COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY, HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES.
On April 1, 1957, a statement on Presidential inability was presented to your subcommittee by the Attorney General. Shortly ,before that the committee on Federal Constitution of the New York State Bar Association presented to your subcommittee a suggested amendment dealing.with that problem. It did net then have before It the recommendations of the Attorney General. However, it agrees with him that In removal, death and resignation the office devolves but that in the case of inability the duties and not the office devolve upon the Vice President, that such inability may be terminated, resulting in the President taking up his duties. It agrees that a constitutional amendment is the best, solution. It Is true that.by usage in those cases where it was impossible for the President to return, the Vice President has taken the oath of office, although there is no specific conAltutional sanction therefor. A constitutional amendment would forever remove doubt. as to this. Such diverse views have been expressed on the question of whether Congress has the power to legislate on inability that it may be contemplated that if such power were exercised by virtue of an act of Congress without constitutional sanction it would be tested in the courts. For those reasons the committee has advocated constitutional amendment.
Our subcommittee on Presidential inability, of which I am the chairman, and
Messrs. Elihu Root, Jr., and Arthur H. Dean are the other members, have not met since the statement of the Attorney General so there has been time for informal discussions only. Hence this memorandum is submitted as an expression of my own views alttiough in general concurred in by the others.
While the Attorney Ceneral advocates constitutional amendment, he does so on a completely different ground. His expressed view Is that the Vice President could not be divested, without constitutional amendment, of the power of determination which he now has. The reason for divesting bird of that power is that he should be given a more limited power to declare inability and then onjy with the consent of a majority of the cabinet who are executive officers. ThiCinento-randum is not primarily concerned with the policy of how to deal with the question
86	PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY
of inability but is submitted in the hop© that it rimy offer some suggestions to those having responsibility as to the interpretation of the Constitution.. It is submitted that the' interpretation of the %Ice President's-power advocatd by the Attorney Ceneral and his recommendation as to the Cabinet acting with the Vito President could not have bren within the contemplation of threfremeriefor the following reasons:
First it would have been a simple matter to have said that the determination of inability shOuld be made by the Vice President. The debates rather indicate that they avoided who Was to raise and' delennine Inability. Nor was' it likely that the framers expected that 'the Vice President would act deterred either by fear of the accusation of usurpation Or reluctance induced by loyalty. Also the exercise of soch a power without explicit direction would have been made at his peril and Might lend to an extraordinary situation in some cases, as for example, where the President declared himself able to perform or resumrehis
Second; nt the time the Constitiition was adopted, the Vice President was the candidate who received the second largest number of votes. The supporters of the rival candidates held quite strongly divergent views which very soon crystallized into a party organization. - It seenis unlikely that it was in the purview of thedraftsman that a recently defeated candidate for President, then serving as Viee President, should be given-power under low cireitinstancea to determine-the ability of thesuccessful candidate to perform his ditties.
Of course, it could not have been within the purview of the framers that the Cabinet shoUld have any responsibility in the matter as the Cabinet was not then "created,
As against the view that this power has been held since 1787 it should be considered. that' (a) it has never been exercised, possibly for the reason that It was feared that the office would be vacated; (b) that it required congreasional action to implernent it; (c) that such implied power was not, sufficiently recognized to justify reffauee on it.
The Attorney General argues that the Vice President has always had this power. He does not deal with the troublesome question which would arise if a President and a Vice President disagreed on the right of determination. His argument is based on theptemise that since the Vito President has the duty of acting in certain contingencies he is clothed with the dittvto"deterinine. when that contingency exists. It does not, of coursei so state in the constitution but. the Attorney General contends that it is a well established ride Of law that, a contingent power gives its grantee the right to determine when to exercise It. In support of this legal generalization four eases are cited. (See citation 26 to Attorney General's Memorandum)
There was sustained in the Aurora, case in 1813 the President's right to proclaim termination of embargo, inthe 'Martin case in 1927 to calling out the militia and in the Field case in' 1881 and the Hampton ease in 1928 the right to determine changing stake of facts to vary tariff. Each of the above acts was done in pursuance of express authority given the President by Congress. This is an entirety different matter from saying that power may be implied where express direction is not given.
The logical conclusion in the interpretation of any constitutional language directing that something be done would be that someone was directed to do it. Unfortunately that does not appear to be so here unless Congress under its broad powers was expected to implement it. If by inference it was expected that anyone had the power*Ithout congressional implementation it la submitted that it would be more likely to be the President himself at least where he was able and willing. The view of the Attorney General is that it requires constitutional amendinent to give the President this power and a constitutional amendment to divest the Vice President of a power which lie always had said apparently the President'never had. It is submitted that not for this reason but for clarification a constitutional amendment should be adopted to settle the question of succession to 'office *here the President cannot resume his duties and of devolution of duties where he may be able to.
April 9, 1957.
Copy for information of Attorney General; Cornelius W. Wickersham,Bar Association Committee Chairman; Arthur II, Dean, Esq.; Eiffel Root, Jr., Esq.
X
:MARTIN TAYLOR.
