Fordham Law School
FLASH: The Fordham Law Archive of Scholarship and History
Congressional Materials	Twenty-Fifth Amendment Archive
1-24-1958
Presidential Inability: Hearings Before the
Subcomittee on Constitutional Amendments of
the Committee on the Judiciary, Senate, 85th
Congress
Special Subcommittee to Study Presidential Inability; Committee on the Judiciary. House of Representatives. United States.
Follow this and additional works at: http://ir.lawnet.fordham.edu/
twentyfifth_amendment_congressional_materials
Part of the Law Commons 
Recommended Citation
Special Subcommittee to Study Presidential Inability; Committee on the Judiciary. House of Representatives. United States., "Presidential Inability: Hearings Before the Subcomittee on Constitutional Amendments of the Committee on the Judiciary, Senate, 85th Congress" (1958). Congressional Materials. 5. http://ir.lawnet.fordham.edu/twentyfifth_amendment_congressional_materials/5
This Book is brought to you for free and open access by the Twenty-Fifth Amendment Archive at FLASH: The Fordham Law Archive of Scholarship and History. It has been accepted for inclusion in Congressional Materials by an authorized administrator of FLASH: The Fordham Law Archive of Scholarship and History. For more information, please contact tmelnick@law.fordham.edu.
PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY
1278
HEARINGS
BEFORE THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON
CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENTS
OF TIM
COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY
UNITED STATES SENATE
EIGHTY-FIFTH CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
ON
S. J. Res. 100, S. J. Res. 133, S. J. Res. 134,
S. J. Res. 141, S. J. Res. 143, S. J. Res. 144,
S. 238, and S. 3113
RELATING TO THE INABILITY OF THE PRESIDENT
TO DISCHARGE THE POWERS AND DUTIES
ON' HIS OFFICE
JANUARY 24, FEBRUARY 11, 14, 18, AND 28, 1958
Printed for the use of the Committee on the Judiciary
UNITED STATES
GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
.22324	WASHINGTON : IAA
COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY
JAMES 0. EASTLAND, Mississippi, Chairman
ESTES KEFAUVER, Tenn*limo OLIN D. JOHNSTON. South Carolina T1OMAS C. IIENNINOS, Ja., Missouri JOHN L. McCLELLAN, Arkansas JOSEPH C. O'MAIIONEY, Wyoming SAM J. ERVIN, Ja., North Carolina JOHN A. CARROLL, Colorado ALEXANDER WILEY, Wisconsin WILLIAM I.ANGER, North Dakota WILLIAM E. JENNER, Indiana ARTHUR V. WATKINS, Utah EVERETT McKINLEY DIRKSEN, Illinois JOHN MARSHALL BUTLER, Maryland ROMAN L. HRUSKA, Nebraska
CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENTS SUBCOMMITTEE
ESTES KEFAUVER, Tennessee, Chairman
THOMAS C. 'JENNINGS, ha., Missouri	WILLIAM LANGER, North Dakota
JAMES 0. EASTLAND, Missimippi	EVERETT McKINLEY DIRKSEN, Illinois
sr
CONTENTS
Statements of—	Pag.
Elliott, William Yandell, professor of history, Harvard University,
Cambridge, Mass 	49
Fowler, Henry, attorney at law, Washington, D. C. and former
Director, Office of Defense Mobilization, Washington, D. C 	106
Kress, Charles, Binghamton, N. Y 	100
Musinanno, Michael A., judge of the Supreme Court of the State of
Pennsylvania 	68
O'Nfrilioney1 lion. Joseph C., it United States Senator from the State
of Wyoming 	18
Rhyne, Charles, president, American Bar Association, Washington,
D. G 	188
Rogers, Hon. William P., United States Attorney General, Wash-
ington, D. C  	147
Taylor, Martin, chairman, subcommittee on Presidential inability, •
New York State bar, New York, N. Y 	85
Waugh, Edgar, professor of history and social sciences, Eastern Mich-
igan 
Colter, Ypsilanti, Mich_	, 	126
Statements submitted by—
Bridges, Hon. Styles 	42
Fulbright, Hon. J. William 	38
Payne, Hon. Frederick G	34
Copy Senate Joint Resolution 141 	1
CopySenate Joint Resolution 143 	2
p  Senate Joint Resolution 144 	3
Copy S. 3113 	4
Copy Senate Joint Resolution 100 	5
Copy Senate Joint Resolution 133 	6
Copy Senate Joint Resolution 134 	6
Co	S. 238 	8
Article II section 1, clause 6, of the Constitution 	8
Section 19 of title 3 of the United States Code entitled "Vacancy in Offices
of Both President and Vice President; Officers Eligible To Act"___ .....	9
Letter dated January 20, 1958, addressed to Hon. Estes Kefauver from
Hon. Herbert Hoover, former President of the United States 	10
Letter dated January 16, 1958, addressed to Hon. Estes Kefauver from
Hon. Harry S. Truman, former President of the United States, enclosing
e copy of an article 	11
Letter datedJanuary 20, 1958, addressed to Hon. Kenneth B. Keating from
Hon. Earl Warren Chief Justice of the United States 	14
News release dated January 22, 1958, from the office of Hon. Kenneth B.
Keating, a Representative from the State of New York 	14
Article, Proposed Constitutional Amendment To Give Congress Power To Determine Disability of the President To Discharge the Powers and Duties of His Office, by Senator O'Mahoney in the Congressional Record
dated January 23, 1958 	28
Article, Presidential Disability, by Senator Kefauver in the Congressional
Record dated January. 13, 1958 	45
Biographical sketch, William Yandell Elliott 	49
Presentation of Martin Taylor, Esq., New York, N. Y., as inserted in the House Judiciary Committee hearing on Presidential inability, held
April 1, 1957 	93
Letter dated March 29, 1957, addressed to Hon. Emanuel Celler, Committee on the Judiciary, House of Representatives, from Cornelius W. Wickersham, chairman, New York State Bar Association, committee on
Federal Constitution 	94
in
IV	CONTENTS
Report of committee on Federal Constitution, New York State Bar Anode. Page
tion, dated December 31, 1957 	98
Biographical sketch, Henry Hamill Fowler 	105
Biographical sketch, Edgar W. Waugh	 126
Biographical sketch, Charles tiyivanus Rhyne	 187
Letter dated January 24, 195% addressed to Hon. Estes Kefauver from
Arthur E. Sutherland, professor of law, Harvard University Cambridge, Mass., with attachment on Presidential disability as printed in the •
	New York Herald Tribune on December 11, 1957   203
Letter dated January 20, 1958 addressed to Hon. Estes Kefauver from _Joseph E. Kaltenbach, professor of political science, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Mieh„ with three enclosures:
1. Pro- constitutional amendment on Presidential succession and
bllity	 207
' 2. Proposed statute implementing the Presidential inability clause... 207
	3. Memorandum on Presidential inability   209
Letter dated January 15, 1958, addressed to Hon. Estes Kefauver from David Allman, professor of political science, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wis. enclosing presentation of Professor Fellman as inserted in the House Judiciary Committee print on Presidential inability, dated
	January 31, 1956   211
Letter dated January 20, 1958, addressed to Hon. Estes Kefauver from Mark DeW. Howe, Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Mass., enclosing presentation of Professor Howe as inserted in the House Judiciary' Com-
mittee print on Presidential inability, dated January 31, 1956 	218
Letter dated January 13, 1958, addressed to Hon. Estes Kefauver from
Women's National Republican Club, Inc., New York, N. Y 	219
Study prepared by Mary Shepard, Foreign Affairs Division, the Library of Congress, Washington D. C. entitled "Presidential Disability: Provi-
	sions in Forelim Constitutions"   220
Letter dated March 2, 1958, addressed to Hon. Estes Kefauver from Lindsay Rogers, Burgess professor of public law; Columbia University, New York, N. Y. enclosing copy of an article entitled "Presidential
Inability" printed in The Review on May 8, 1920	 231
Letter dated March 3, 1958, addressed to lion. Estes Kefauver from William W. Crosskey, professor of law, University of Chicago Law School, Chicago, Ill., enclosing copy of an article entitled "Presidential Disability a Judicial Issue,"as printed in the Chicago Daily News on
April 19, 1957	 235
Letter dated March 4, 1958, addressed to Hon. Estes Kefauver from
Jack W. Peltason, apartment of political science, University of Illinois,
Urbana, Ill 	237
Letter dated March 5, 1958, addressed to Hon. Estes Kefauver from James Hart, department of political science, University of Virginia,
	Charlottesville Va   237
Letter dated March 6, 1958, addressed to Hon. Estes Kefauver from Murray Kornfeld executive director, American College of Chest Phy-t old 
en*, Chicago, Ili	 239
Letter dated hiarch 6, 1958, addressed to lion. Estes Kefauver. from Arnold J. Lien, department of political science, Washington University,
St. Louts, Mo' '	 240
Letter dated March 13, 1958, addressed to Hen. Estes Kefauver from
Thomas K. Finletter, New York, N. Y. former Secretary of the Air Force	 240
Copy Senate Joint Resolution 8, 84th Congress, 1st session, as passed
the Senate	 241
' DATES Or HEARINGS
January 24, 1958 	1
February 11, 1958 	67
February.14, 1958 	105
February 18, 1958	 ' 147
February 28, 1958. ,	 187
PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY
FRIDAY, JANUARY 24, 1958
UNITED STATES SENATE,
SUBCOMMITPEE ON CONSTrruTIONAL AMENDMENTS
OF THE COMMITTEE ox 'mg JUDICIARY
Washington, D. C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 2:10 p. m., in room 424, Senate Office Building, Hon. Estes Kefauver (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Senators Kejanfirc.Langer,
Also present: Wa • H. Smithey, member, pro Tonal staff, Sen-
ate Judiciary Co	ttee.
Senator KEts.	The commi	come to orde
This is the bcoMmittee . he dim	mmittee
tional Amen,. < ents com	o the n a tor f m North
Langer; th Senator •m	'is, A . bir n; the chai
full comm. tee, Sena r Eastla d	ssissip and the
from Mi uri, Mr. Hennin
The pi • of the meal I/1 a is to art ear gs on a
of resol ions pro	a	endment • t Con itution
provisio. .to dote	the i !hi ir of th:	:-:iden of the
States	discha e his	e	ant .. the remo
that di;-:	Iso, t e • mmittit.Urf. : • :fore it two bills same sub
We wi order t AI of e •I	s an ills be p
this place in the h, fing, Sena	esolution 141, by
O'Malione a joint resolution '	ILStitll • nal am
Senate*Join Resolution •	and 1	y Mr. idges,
by Mr. Brid	the two	lutions tropt	constituti
ments, Senate tint Resolution 11 • Sena Fulbri proposing a cons and 134 by the chai constitutional amendm
ing to act in this field by	•
ment. S. 8113, which was filed yesterday by Senator Bridges, is a bill.to deal with this subject by-legislation rather than by constitutional amendment.
All of these will be printed in the record at this point.
(S. J. Res. 141, 144, 143, 100, 138, and 184, S. 238, and S. 3118' are
as follows:)
(8. J. Res. 141. With Cong., 24:1 sees.]
JOINT RESOLUTION Proposing in amendment to fish Constitution of the United States relating to the ffietermlnation of the inability of the President-to. discharge the power, and duties of his office
Resolved by Ike Renate and H01410 of Represealatives of She United Slates Of Americo in Congresi assembled (two-thirds of ea.:* Howe oosoarritsy
1
I I
Constitu-kota, Mr. n of the nator
ber make nited' al of n the
utional amendment) Senate Joint an of this subcommittee, S. 288 is a bill b
ted at nator dment, S. 3118 al amend-tora resolution esolutions 133 utions proposing nator Payne propos-out constitutional amend-
Z.- I
•
'	1.11L1,11,E,vriti. INAtalcv
threele), fiat tho followiug artleto 10 10,010)..4441 014 1114 nwoudmrni 10 Mt Vim.
MI(1111011 et the IItilted ten(01. tv111rh I'hnll 'iv willd (I, nil	mid imituomo
AN Part of the	ton when retitled 11y the legislatures	Ihrer.feurtlei of
I ho seeerel SI ill t
"Aortas
"Sset tea 1, Witenewe the Presitleitt 11110olitix the! he IN nimble hi ilimelmrgit tho powers nil dillies lit hit 0111CP. Or IV111110V01' the Semite find the House of
Itepresenlittives pass it resolution by it	vele of eaelt Millie declaring
that the Pre:stilled is 111401110 III diseherge Ile, (severe and stillION of IIIs ellho. Iho Vito Proslileitt, or if there he Ito Viet+ President. the idliver 110111 111 11110 of Nth,. eNtik1till Iti 1110 onus's' of President ii provided by low, ellen be Ailing President.
"See,	An Aelliig President shell exerelie the powers mid (Milo. of the
oilier+ of Presliteet muter lids ortivie	the end of Ow then mirrent
piestitettliel term, ('2) 01101% Aeline Piosidritt (hide end ',minims	tint lit-
of the President tin longer exlits, IN the Ilinifillty of the President IN determined, in neeordeliee With seilliet a of (his article, ne limiter to exist, whieltever first items,
1. Whenever, dieing any 1101111Ii In 1r111oh nn Acting President is du o eller-Meg the power* Mut thilliet of the settee of ['remittent illider this tallete, the Senate and the House of Representatives poem n reiltiltillon declaring that the Ittehillly of the Pwiitilent lit illscluirge the powers nail dude of his °Mee 110 longer exists` (ho Ailing Preelilent shall twee to exereise the powers and dittios of 11w mike of President and the President shall exerelse such powers end Iloilo&
"Sse, 1. The l'ongreits may by dew' provide for the onto where, either or lbetem of Oititgress are not Iu sesston, (teetering what officer or tinkers N111111 ok0,000110 snob limov or Mouses for (Ile 1,1101115050 of 0111111111W 1111'111 to 1100'ff$1111
111s ‘1111	iottferred itpott them by tuba nrltele.
This ortlele shall be Inoperative bolus 11 shell hate 114'011 ratified es
an	as
alilNitittlellt to	Vonstitiithei	the legislatures of 1111ve. r.ouri I	r ..w
icor-oral States within sewn years from the Mite nr itS 51111111ismisill."
..--•••••••••••
I S. J. Rea. I Ct. :4311teolig. 2q1
JOINT /INSIIIMTION	ninvoilroont to Ilin roortitolloo ot the trolled Stntoe
ttl prevt.lo for dew, otto511Ion of' Itio ;11,1111)- of nn' 1'41,141011i It) ilitkclutrite the !worts mitt datiOt et his oilier
ReM1Yri he Ike Senate wort !loose of Reprise ofolice.‘ of the Colli it Moot of America Se Compress essceihtrit (firo-thfril4 or coeh House eonettreirto therein), That the toltowing article Is proposed as en nmeielinent to lite eimstiltillon of the Pulled States. which shall be valid to all Intents mid intreoses as pert of the (\Institution when retitled by the legislatures of three.fotirtlis of the several
"Annew
-S.,px.inte. 1. The President pro tempore of the Senate. the Speaker of the House of Representatives, the majority leader of the Senate, the minority leader of the Senate, the majority leader of the House of Representtilives nod the minority leader of the House of RepreiviitotivN shell eon:dilute a committee for the consideration of any question whielt may arise as to the Inability of the President to diseharge.the powers and duties of his office. §ucli committee shall be convened (1) whenever the Vice President, by letter transmitted to the President pro tempers, of the Senate and to the Speaker of the House of Representatives, may suggest that doubt exists as to the ability of the President to discharge the powers and duties of his office. or (2) upon request made by any four of the members of such committee. Pour members thereof shall constitute a quorum. Whenever such committee is convened tinder this section, the committee shall determine whether there is probable cause for belief that the President is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office. If the committee determines by affirmative rote of not less than four members, that such probable caw* exists. the majority leader of the Senate shall introduce In the Senate, land the majority leader of the House shall introduce in the House, a concurrent resolution stating in substance that it has been determined by the Congress that the President is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office. Upon the adoption by both Houses of the Congress, by the affirmative vote of
PIO-AIDEN'ttAL INARILITY	a
not leas then two-thirds of the Members present mid ruling In each !loose, of any such concurrent resolution, the powers and duties of the (Mice of President shnll devolve upon Ow Vice President, who shell then disehnrge such powers and duties milli the disnbilify of the President la removed, or until ri new President is elected owl inken office, whichever meets Curlier.
"Sen. 2. Whenever the Vice President has 'Hemmed the powers and ditties of the office of President under eeetion 1, nod the President therenfter, by letter trnitstnitted In the President pro tempera of the timothy end to the Speriker of the Heinle of ItepressmIntives, edvista that In his opinion his inability to aloe churge the power.; and duties of his env 110 longer exists, lint committee eslab-!lolled by section 1 shell he reconvened. Upon the brisk of inch letter the ma-jorily lender of the fiennte shrill introduce In the Semite, nod the majority lender of the House shall introduce In the House, a coecturent resolution eteling In subsinnee that It has been determined by the Congress that the inability of thePresident to dischnrge the powers rind duties of his office no longer exists. Upon the adoption by both !louses of filo Congress. by tunjority vote of all Members present end voting in each Molise, of nny concurrent resolution Introduced in complinnee with this section, Ilse President shell resume the discharge of the powers and (bales of his office, aryl the Vice President shall resume the dis-elinrge of the powers and duties of the Office of Vice President.
"Snit. II, Any concurrent resolution introduced tinder section 1 or section 2 of this article in either House of the Congress shell be pieced Immedintely upon the proper ealetniar of such Rouse without reference to eraornlitte. In debate mum nny such concurrent resolution In the Senate, tie Senator tna„19 speak In all
more than one hour, ntul	illIntory motion shall be le order. It shell be the
duly of the Presiding Officer of the Senate to keep the time of Pitch Senator who spenks In such dphnte, and points of order end tit/peals from the decisions of the Presiding Officer Audi he deckled without tiehnti•.
"See, 4. If the committee established hy section 1 of this article determines, nt nog time nt which the Congress Is not In session, that there Is probable coo*, for belief flint the President In tumble to diselsorge the powers' and duties cif his once, the Congress inny be convened In special session, upon the call of the President pro ternpore of the Senate end the Speaker of the throe of Itepre-mettintives titling Jointly, for the considerntien of nny concurrent resolution ire !minced In complinnce with the provisions of this article.
"Sm. ti. This nrilele shall be Inoperative unless It shall have been ratifkll ae an amendment to the Constitution by the legislature,' of three-foerths of the several Metes within seven years from the dote of its mnbmIsslon."
0.w.•••••••••••.••
J. tics. 144, 85th Cong., 24 /*es.]
JOINT 1116111.11TI0N Proposing an amendment to the Constitution of the United Mates I" make provision for the continuous discharge of the Dowers And ?Mies of tbe tit of
the President of the United Hellos
Respired by the Senate and fleece of ReprescnIal fres of the United Slates of America in Congress assembled (tire-thirds of each fleece concurring therein), That the following article is proposed as an amendment to the Constitution of the United Slates, which shall be vend to all intents and purposes as part of the Constitution when retitled by the legislatures of three-fourths of the several States:
"Atrricr.e—
"Sterro:c 1. In the case of the removel of the President from office. or his death or resignation, the Vice President shall become President. and shall serve as such for the remainder of the term for which his predecessor was elected. In the case of the inability of the President to discharge the powers and duties of his office, such powers and duties shall devolve upon the Vice President. and shalt be discharged by him during the continuance of the Inability of the President.
"Sze. 2. The Congress may provide by law for the case of the removal, death, resignation, or inability of both the President and the Vice President, declaring what officer shall then discharge the powers and duties of the face of the President, and such officer shall discharge such powers and duties until the disability is removed, or a new President is elected and has taken Ake.
"Sao. 3. The Congress shall provide by law for the determination of all questions of fact arising under section 1 and section 2 of the article. If the Congress
4	IN,A131 MTV
determines, by concurrent resolution adopted In each House with the concurrence of two-thirds of the Members thereof present and voting, that there is no person chosen In accordttneo with this Constitution to be President, or qualified In accordance with section 1 or section 2 of this article to dischergo the powers and duties of the office of the President, who is able to discharge the powers and duties of such office, the Congress by concurrent resolution so adopted may designate, or provide for the designation of, a person who than discharge such pewers and duties until a person so chosen or qualified Is available for the discharge of such powers end tint lee.
"Sao. 4. If, at any time At which the Congress IS not in session, the President pro tempers of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives should determine that there is probable cause for belief that there is no person chosen In accordance with this Constitution to be President, or qualified in accordance with section 1 or section 2 of this article to discharge the powers and duties of the °Mee of the President, who is able to discharge the powers and duties of such office, the Congress may bo convened In special session, upon the tell of the President pro tempera of the Senate and the speaker of the House of Representatives acting jointly, for the consideration of any concurrent resolution which may be introduced pursuant to section 8 Of this article.
"Sao. 5. The sixth paragraph of section 1 article II of this Constitution is repealed.
"Sea O. This article shall be inoperative unless it shall have been ratified as an amendment to the Constitution by the legislatures of three-fourths of the Rev-eral States within seven years from the date of its submission."
18. Silk Stith Cong., 2d sees.)
A PILL To provide for the determination of the ability of the President to discharge the powers and duties of his Mee, and for other purposes
Be it enacted by The Senate and House of Representatives of the United Slates of America is Congress assembled, That (a) chapter 1 of title 8 of the United States Code is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new section:
21. Determination of ability of the President to discharge the powers and duties of his office
"(a) The President pro tempore of the Senate, the Speaker of the House of Representatives, the majority leader of the Senate, the minority leader of the Senate, the majority leader of the House of Representatives, and the minority leader of the House of Representatives shall constitute a committee for the consideration of any question which may arise as to the inability of the President to discharge the powers and duties of his office. Such committee shall be convened (1) whenever the Vice President, by letter transmitted to the President pro tempore of the Senate and to the Speaker of the House of Representatives, may suggest that doubt exists as to the ability of the President to discharge the powers and duties of his office, or (2) upon request made by any four of the members of such committee. Four members thereof shall constitute a quorum.
"(b) Whenever such committee is convened pursuant to subsection (a), the committee shall determine whether there is probable cause for belief that the President is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office. If the committee determines, by affirmative vote of not less than four members, that such probable cause exists, the majority leader of the Senate shall introduce in the Senate, and the majority leader of the House shall introduce in the House, a concurrent resolution stating in substance that it has been determined by the Congress that the President is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office.
"(c) Upon the adoption by both Houses of the Congress, by the affirmative vote of not less than two-thirds of the Members present and voting in each House, of any concurrent resolution introduced pursuant to subsection (b), the powers and duties of the office of President shall devolve upon the Vice President, who shall then discharge such powers and duties until the disability of the President is removed, or until a new President is elected and takes office, whichever occurs - earlier.
"(d) Whenever the Vire President has assumed the powers and duties of the (Mee of President, and the President thereafter, by letter transmitted to the President pro tempore of the Senate and to the Speaker of the llonse of Representatives, advises that in his opinion Ms inability to discharge the powers and
PRII3IDESTIAL INADUATY	5
ditties of his office no longer exists, the committee established by subsection (a) shall be reconvened. Upon the basis of such letter, the majority leader of the Senate shall introduce in the Renate, and the majority leader of the House shall Introduce in the House, a concurrent resolution stating in substance that it has been determined by the Congress that the inability of the President to discharge the powers and duties of his office no longer exists.
"(e) Upon the adoption by both Houses of the Congress, by majority vote of all Members present and voting In each House, of any concurrent resolution introduced pursuant to subsection (d), the President, shall resume the discharge of the powers and duties of his office, and the Vice President shell resume the 'discharge of the powers and duties of the office of Vice President."
(b) The sectional analysis of chapter 1 of title 3 of the United States Code is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new item:
"21. Determination of ability of the President to discharge the powers and duties of his office"
Ste 2. (a) The following provisions of this section are enacted by the Congress:
(1) As an exercise of the :Memel:Eng power of the Senate and the House of Representatives, respectively, and as such they shall, be considered as part of the rules of that House to which they specifically apply; and such rules shall supersede other rules only to the extent that they are inconsistent therewith; sad
(2) With full recognition of the constitutional Hatt of either House to dittoes such rules (so far as relating to the procedure In such House) at any time, In the same manner and to the same extent as In the case of any other rule of such Douse.
(b), Rule	of the Standing Rules	the Senate is amended by adding at
the end thdreof the following newparagraph :
"7. Any edneurrent resolution Introduced pursuant to the provisions of section 21 of title 8 of the United States Code shall upon introduction be placed upon tho Calendar without reference to committee. No such concurrent resolution shall be subject to amendment. In debate upon any such concurrent resolution—
"(a) no Senator shall be entitled to speak In all more than one hour, and it shall be the duty of the Presiding Officer to keep the time of each Senator
•	who speaks; and
"(b) no dilatory motion shall be In order, and points of order and appeals from the decision of the Presiding Officer shall be decided without debate."
(c) Rule XXII of the Rules of the House of Representatives is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph :
"0. Any concurrent resolution introduced pursuant to the provisions of section 21 of title 3 of the United States Code shall upon introduction be placed upon the House Calendar without reference to committee."
M. 3. Res. 100, gEth Cong., 1st, semi
-JOINT RESOLUTION Relating to the Inability of the President to discharge the powers
and duties of his once	. •
Resolved by the Senate and Ifinsse of Representatives Of the United States of America fn Congress assembled (two-thirds of each House concurring therein), That the following article is proposed as an amendment to the Constitutionthe United States, which shall be valid to all Intents and purposes as part of the Constitution when ratified by the legislatures of three-fourths of the,several
States:	•
"Amax—
"Szorion 1. Whenever the two House of Congress shall adopt a resolution declaring that the Convex; believes that the President is unable, by reason of .physical or mental- disability, to discharge the powers and duties of his *Mee, *etch resolution shall be trinismitted to the Suprenie Court of the United States, and the Court shall decide whether or not such inability exists. If tliaCoUrt decides, by a majority vote of the authorized membership. that such an inability exists, the powers and duties of President shall devolve upon the Vice President,
•or if there be no Vice President, upon the person next in line of ineeensian to the
office of President, as proyided by law.	•
'The Vice Preeident or other person upon .whom,the powers and duties el
the President have developed pursuant to proceedings under th1ne.4100e, at
6	P1112.81hEwelat.
amendment shall coatinge to exorcise much powers and dudes until the end of the prestilentini term then in effect, unless it ham previously been determined that the inability of the President no longer exist., in which event the Mee!. dent Mall reassume tho powers and duties of his office. Ouch a determination shall bo made In the same remitter as herein provided for determining the guts-lion of the President's inability to perform the power* and duties of his office.
'Por the purposes of this nettle of amendment, a quorum in each Ileum° of Magma shall consist of two-thirds of the total number of members thereof.
"Siva.*. In the event the Ciongrees la not hi session, and In the opinion of the Vice President, or if there bo no Vice President, the President pro tempi:ore of the Senate, and the Speaker of the House of Hepresentntivtvi circumstances exist which create a doubt as to the ability of the President to discharge the powers and duties of his office, they may by joint action call the Congress Into special session for the purpose of considering whether the Preeldent is unable to dim. charge the powers and duties of his office.
"In the event the Congress Is not In session, and in the opinion of the Prest. dent pro tempore of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives circumstances exist which indicate that the inability which occasioned action pursuant to section 1 no tenser exists, they may by joint action call the Controls, into spectal session for the purpose of considering whether or not such in. ability still Wets.
"Sao. 8. The provisions of this article of Amendment shall apply to any person upon whom the powers and duties of the office of President have devolved in the same manner such provisions apply to the President.
"Ste. 4. This Art tele shall not. apply to any person holding the office of President when this article was proposed by the Congress.
"Sao. 5. This article shalt be inoperative unless it shall have been ratified as an amendment to the Constitution by the legislatures of three-fourthe of the sev. eral States within seven years from the date of its submission."
4111•MONIM.•
(S. J. Res. 188. Roth Cong., Id ices.)
JOINT RESOLUTION Proposing en amendment to the Constitution of Ike United States to make provision for The Congress to determine Ole !nubility of the President of the United Staten to discharge the powers and duller of tits office
Resolved by the Bennie and Howse of Repretentitires of the United Male* of Americo Sit Oomprees assembled, (two-thirds of eaeh Mouse concurring therein), That the following article is proposed as an amendment to the Comm. stitution of the United States, which shall be vnikl to all intents and purposes as a part of the Constitution when ratified by the legislatures of three•feurtha of the several States:
"Aarrout —
''Scenes 1. The Congress may provide by law for the procedure for (1) determining the inability of the President to discharge the powers and duties of his office, and (2) determining when the inability of the President to discharge the powers and duties of his office has ceased to exist. Upon a determination that the President is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office, such powers and duties shall devolve upon the Vice President, and Mall be discharged by him during the continuance of the disability of the President.
"See. 2. This article shall be inoperative unless it shall have been ratified as an amendment to the Constitution by the legislatures of three-fourths of the several States within seven years from the date of its submission."
IS. J. Res. 184, 85th Cong., 24 sees.]
JOINT RESOLUTION Proposing an amendment to the Constitution of the United Stites to establish a committee to determine the inability of the President to discharge the powers and duties of his dike
Resolved by the Benet. and Howse Of Representative of the United States of dowries is Congress assembled (ttoo-thirds of each How donourring therein), That the following article is proposed se an amendment to the Constitution of the United States, which shall be valid to all intents and purposes as part of the COnstitution when ratified by the legislatures of three-fourths Of the
several Stated:
Pit 1,',811/KN Ti A I. MA1111.17 V	7
"AsticLe —
"Heortos 1. In the ease of the removal of the President from office, or his heath or resignation, the Vice President shell becolne ',resident and shall servo until the end of the then current Presidential term, In the ease of the inability of the President to discharge the powers and duties of his office the powers and duties shell devolve upon the Vice President, end shell be discharged by hint during the continuniton of the inability of the President, Inuring any such period the compensation of the Vice President shall be at the rate then provided by law in the ease of the President.
"Ho. 2. The Congress may provide by law for the case of the removal, death, resist:111ton, or inability of both the President and the Vice President, declaring what officer shell then discharge the powers and duties of the office of President, end such officer shnlL discharge such powers and duties until the disability is removed, or a President Is elected.
"Ste, 8. For the ptirpotie of determining the inability of the President to discharge the powers end ditties of the office of President, there is hereby vital,-limbed n eommittee consisting of the Chief Justice of the United Slate*, who shall servo as eliairmali of such committee and who shall here no vote in any of its proceedings, the leader in the Senate of the political petty having the greatest number of Members of the Senale, the leader in the Senate of the political party having the second greatest number of Members of the Senate, the leader in the House of Representatives of the political party having the greatest number of Meinbers of the Meuse of Representatives, the leader in the house of Repro-eentetives of the political party having the second greatest number of Members Of the House of Representatives, and the bends of the executive departments of the (loveretnent.
"lbw. 4. Whenever the Vito President proclaims that in his opinion dream-Monroe exist which establish a reasonable doubt as to whether or not the President is able to discharge the powers and duties of his office, or whenever the Chief Justice of the United States receives communications in writing from any six members of the committee established by section 8 of this article stating that they have reasonable cause to believe that the President is unable to discharge the powers and duties of the office of President, the Chief Justice of the United States shall forthwith call together the members of the committee established by section 8 of this article In order that they may determine whether or not the President Is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office and to vote on the question 'Is the President unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office? If a majority of the authorized membership of such committee decides that question in the affirmative, the President and the Vice President shall be notified by written communication and the Vice President shall discharge the powers and duties of the office of President.
"ego, 5. The Vice President shall discharge the powers and duties of the office of President under this article until (1) the end of the then current presidential term, or (2) the inability of the President is determined in accordance with section 8 no longer to exist, la hichever first occurs,
"Sze. 8. Whenever, during any period in which the Vice President is discharging the powers and duties of the office of President under this article, the Vice President proclaims that the inability of the President to discharge the Powers and duties of his office no longer exist, or the Chief Justice of the United States receives communications In writing from any six members of the committee established by section 8 of this article stating that they have reasonable cause to believe that the inability of the President to discharge the powers and duties of his office no long exists, the Chief Justice of the United States shall forthwith call together the members of the committee esablished by section 3 this article in order that they may determine whether or not the inability of the President to dischafge the powers and duties of his office continues to exist. Such committee shall vote on the question 'Does the inability of the President to discharge the powers and duties of his office continue to exist?. If a majority, of the authorized membership of such committee decides that question in the negative, the committee shall notify the President and Vice President by written communication and the President shall then reassume the powers and duties of his office:
"Sze 7. The sixth paragraph of section 1 of article II of this Constitution is repealed.
"See 8. This article shall be inoperative unless it shall have been ratified as an amendment to the Constitution bb the legislattlies of thrtelourthe of the several States within seven years from the date of its rebisission.”
8	PRESIBRNTIAL INABILITY
(8. 238, 85th Cong., tst seas.]
A 1111.14 To amend title S of the United States Code to provide for the ascertainment of the physical inability of the President to perform the duties of his office and for other purposes
Ile it enacted by the Senate and house of Representatives of the United States of America In Congress assembled, That (n) the analysts of chapter 1 of tale 8 of the United States Code (entitled "The President") le amended by inserting at the end thereof the following new item :
"i 2i. Ascertainment of the physical Inability of the President to discharge his duties."
(b) Such chapter Is amended by inserting at the end thereof the following
new section:
"I 21. Ascertainment of the physical inability of the President to discharge his duties
"(a) In case of the physical inability of the President to discharge the powers and duties of the office of President, he shall so notify the Congress by written communication made to the Speaker of the Rouse of Representatives and to the President pro tempera of the Senate. Upon the transmission of such communication, the powers and duties of such office shall devolve upon the Vice President, who shall discharge them until the President notifies the Congress, by written communication made to the Speaker of the House and to the Pres!. dent pro tempers of the Senate, of his ability to reassume the powers and duties of his office, or until a new President is inaugurated.
"(b) If, at the time of any notification to the Congress by the President of his physical inability to discharge the powers and duties of his office, there is no Vice President, such powers and duties shall devolve, for the duration of such physical inability, upon the appropriate officer In line of succession, as determined pursuant to section 10 of this chapter.
"(C) In case of the death, resignation, removal from office, or physical Inability of the Vice President while discharging the powers and duties of the
office of the President, such	and duties shall devolve upon the appropriate officer In line of succession, as determined pursuant to section 10 of this chapter, until the President, or the Vice President in the case of his temporary inability to discharge the powers and duties of such office, notifies the Congress by written communication to the Speaker of the House and the President pro tSmpore of the Senate of his ability to reassume the powers and duties of such office, or until a new President is inaugurated.
1(d) If the Vice President has sufficient cause to believe that the President is suffering from a physical Inability to discharge the powers and duties of his office and by reason thereof is unable to so notify the Congress pursuant to subsection (a), the Vice President shall so notify the Chief Justice of the United States. Upon receipt of any such notice, the Chief Justice shall establish a panel of not less than three or more than five members appointed by him from qualified medical specialists in civil life. Each member of such panel shall examine the President and shall submit Individually his report to the Chief Justice, specifying his findings as to the physical condition of the President and his conclusion on the question whether the President is suffering from any physical inability to discharge the powers and duties of his office. If all members of such panel concur in the conclusion that the President la suffering from such physical inability, the Chief Justice shall so notify Congress by written communication made to the Speaker of the House and to the President pro tempore of the Senate. Any such notification shall have the same effect as a notification transmitted by the President to the Congress under subsection (a).
"(e) If, at any time at which there is no Vice President, the appropriate officer in line of succession, as determined pursuant to section 19 of this chapter, has sufficient cause to believe that the President fa suffering from a physical inability to discharge the powers and duties of his office and by reason thereof is unable to so notify the Congress pursuant to subsection (a), such officer shall so notify the Chief Justice, of the United States. Any such notification shall have the same effect as a notification transmitted to the Chief Justice by the Vice President under subsection (d)."
ASTICLS II, SSOTION i, CLAUSE 6 Or rag CONBTTTUTION
•	-
In case of the removal of the President from office, or of his death, resignation, or inability to discharge the powers and duties of the said office, the same shall
PliKtillMITIAL INABILITY	9
devolve on the Vice President, and the Congress may by law provide for the case of removal, death, resignation or inability, both of the President and Vice President, declaring what officer shall then act as President, and such officer shall act accordingly, until the disability be removed, or a President shall be elected.
&orlon JO OF TITLE. 3 OF THE UNITED STAYER CODE ENTITLED "VACANCY IN OFEICF.S Cr EOTII PRESIDENT AND VICE PRESIDENT; OFFICERS EttaIBLE To ACT"
(a) (1) If, by reason of death, resignation, removal from office, inability, or failure to qualify, there is neither a President nor Vice President to discharge the powers and duties of the office of President, then the Speaker of the House of Representatives shall, upon his resignation as Speaker and as Representative In Congress, act as President.
(2) The same rule shall apply in the case of the death, resignation, removal from office, or inability of an Individual acting as President under this subsection.
(b) If, at the time when under subsection (a) of this section, a Speaker is to begin the discharge of the powers and duties of the office of President, there is no Speaker, or the Speaker falls to qualify as Acting President, then the President pro temper() of the Senate shall, upon his resignation RS President pro tempore and as Senator, act as President.
(e) An individual acting as President under subsection (a) or subsection (b) of this section shall continue to act until the expiration of the then current Presidential term, except that—
(1) It his discharge of the powers and duties of the office Is founded in whole or in part on the failure of both the President-elect and the Vico President-elect to qualify, then he shall act only until a President or Vice President qualifies; and
(2) it his discharge of the powers and duties of the office is founded on whole or In part on the inability of the President or Vice President, then he shall act only until the removal of the disability of one of such individuals. (d) (1) If, by reason of death, resignation, removal from office, Inability, or failure to qualify, there is no President pro tempore to act as President under subsection (b) of this section, then the officer of the United States who is highest on the following list, and who is not under disability to discharge the powers and duties of the office of President shall act as President: Secretary of State, Secretary of the Treasury, Secretary of Defense, Attorney General, Postmaster General, Secretary of the Interior, Secretary of Agriculture, Secretary of Commerce, Secretary of Labor.
(2) An individual acting as President under this subsection shall continue so to do until the expiration of the then current Presidential term, but not after a qualified and prior•entitled individual is able to act, except that the removal of the disability of an Individual higher on the list contained in paragraph (1) of this subsection or the ability to qualify on the part of an individual higher on such list shall not terminate his service.
(3) The taking of the or.lh of office by an individual specified in the list In paragraph (1) of this subsection shall be held to constitute his resignation from the office by virtue of the holding of which he qualifies to act as President.
(o) Subsections (a), (b), and (d) of this section shall apply only to such officers as are eligible to the office of President under the Constitution. Subsection (d) of this section shall apply only to officers appointed, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, prior to the time of the death, resignation, removal from office, inability, or failure to qualify, of the President pro tempore, and only to officers not under Impeachment by the House of Representatives at the time the powers and duties of the office of President devolve upon them.
(f) During the period that any individual acts as President under this section, his compensation shall be at the rate then provided by law in the case of the President (June 25, 1918, ch. 644, see. 1,62 Stat. 872).
Senator LANOER. We will consider them all at, one time, will we, Mr. Chairman?
Senator KEFAUVER. WO will consider these all at. one time, and anymore that may be introduced during the time we are having our hearings.
10	OttK.AlittiN1'1.‘1. INA1111,11
The very able romisel of one suiwominitlee 11e, Wayne Smithey(
who 6 a specialist in eonst it tit build problems.
1 had i vory Aim 1.4110,,m,,iii whip!' I trill tlii~'rf  I	he
011111411)
in tin% roisturf
nl  Oils point,
1106nv we  proivoti to hoot' testimony thin afternoon, I Iiihtth It.
'Malta ItO well	ti" chnirnuul of the 8116`011111111i1N1 1111
tutinnnl Allalatha011ts, to 11140 n few haaalltFl.
Any monititkoia to the It 'mm111111111 114 it no Itie of flittilliaa 111111011.
It is parhenintly :4) Mimi, ns hew, wt' Iwo donllog w101	011iee of
the Presideney of the 1 Tnited 81 at es, which In probably the most
tam office in the free world, Serious though It. may 1w) Ililm Is not
the first instance	whielt the Cimgres.0 nail the people or the I to1101
Stalk* hi% vo unit  notioSio 111 61) 110011F4 (11011, W110111011 1)11 11/$1,1411)111 11111-%41110os In tho olittv....0 of Iht' c1,1141 11Hilint rolik(Inu fit the Foilititimtioi to the Prt‘sidenes Aiming periods when the President In disabled,
Doling the hayfield and Wilson ailinlillstrid Ions, the Nnhoil wan eonfronted with vivid illustrations of the Impasse %Odell MY Wank WIWI% a Pmsident of the Poked States is incapacitated. Despite their eNthlr10111,0, the legislators of 010;40 eras did tint 141WVEMal In fashioning a solution to the problem, Tolley, however, the Prenblent of ion' United StatN4, having been himself subjected to Illnemem of a faalalla nature during his term or office, has urged dud thin Congress Mania a proposed eonstitut ions) amendment 10 Siete legimln1 oven (Or rid Mention. We have, in addition, in answer to my Inquiry, Hs eluilrolan of this subcommittee, reettived smovni Ions from two former Presidents) Maier( IrlaWer Rad HAM 5, T111011111 Whow voi111111111killioti4 I wilt submit for inclusion in the record at the dose of oty remarks. Willi these expressions before its, we may now ()tweed Iii a nonpartisan manner to seek to oVelvollal a formidable obstacle, namely, the &vision as to what individual or group is best qualified 10 determine when the Piwident is disabled and when Ito has reenvered sufficiently to undertake the (sworn and duties of his office.
'rho stibcommit tee is scheduled to hold heariugm today and Inter
on this issue. it is likely when	have completed 10(1'104 hearing
that it will be necessary to laid additional !wallow. We Want the best advice which it. in possible to obtain. We seek, and indeed we have already sought, to secure the thoughts of so::79 of the most, knowledgeable and able »ien in the United States. If this subcommittee, and ultimately the Congress, may come to an agreement concerning a desirable alternative to 1 lie exist log constitutional provisions, we will have served to assure the undisturbed operation of our highest. office not only for ourselves but for all the peoples of the world who look to this Nation for leadership in the preservation of democratic institutions.
(The statements refer i•ed to above are as follows:)
THE KEY LAI(00 ANOIS.RA Cm's, Homestead, Fla., January 20, 1958.
Hon. ESTEE; KEFAUVER,
Chairman, Standing Subcommittee on Constitutional Amendments,
United Stales Senate, Washington, D. C.
Mr DEAR SENATOR: I have received your kind note requesting my views on the Proposed bills you send me.
I assume that the question is solely the method otdetermining the "Inability" of the President "to discharge the powers and duties of his office," and contained in It also the method of determining the "removal of disability."
Pit eft ill;NTIAli	11
AII titit,mtletet	powt•eeelett eeetu covered by article II, mection I, pnrogrnph
h of the Iniiulllalluu, and therefore leitishitien on this miii/Jett preen to ma
lIIIIleti	try,
I. '!`hart' eeeiee to	Murat' rhltMllulr as In Whether remedy CHU b. foiHid it,
platulury I/1W or 11010 Ili ill/11110 Mill011111/1/11111 antetidinetit, 'the Congrens , will need decide whether the !hefts-teeelletied witon In the Oonotilttilott would be multiplied nnitoorily for ti Attilututy
/419'11111 lu HIP Milt Iho /111.1111/11 of determlniutt "Mobility" of "tetwtoty" reiiIlIrn iditisliterat loll of the 011411 of the itepittallott of twitters In !fie (JOIef WWI( end terliiiii ttaillllunnl lenidlimi sr Web hare become flittql Iii hilt notional life doing theINIMI 1110 years.
II. The	ourd	'.'he Preeldent are Pfeeled ON the clunten leaden of
ti 1,411111PM party with declined iiintulefes, priticiptee, ottintiono of Inntien, and hroinhten to tho toeeple,
4, The Collgreret, Irl IMP or both (rOliAilig Is Orlell r011itelleil try nn OPINAiniffi end limo by Itiesto who nre, In vrticlite, snottily onmineti to the immiltilee tor ptimiliee upon whiela the Prersidetil /Old Vita Pft.ithiehl fife elected tip 110,11(4111W,
It An	!NON Olt! to (he aeitaralbintitit flint a Preeldent'm hint/1111y to
mitre t.r hie pesedble reattititilen to office elimild be determined by the landing otfleiftle to ifie exteuilive branch, mi they am of the party borlog the rengiotinibib Hien tleternibmil
11, I believe (lint it elite 1' einpluiteent to ltio Coluditution (or possibly nIntutoty two euulilprowl+ for 'I pottatilonlon made no front the exectitive branch to
mete' the licrermimitimin requited, I do not raiment bog the	tterrtono
hp mimed bill ihnl the dermas/1mile or tigenelas be etonnereted, whose OM 119100 lit heed elloillii be it member of 511011 a torrenbielen, lime number conk) well be Molted (ii net lox limn 7 and not mote than 15 otteh heads of deport-inenfot fir egmictee. There ctiiiiii be le further frtfolkhoti (bet they rdertdd eeek the nil vice of it pallet of estelletteed phymiclatie or eurgteme,
I vented eimeelve of nay circumstance when 'Melo a defined body of Modem heel the pktwillivio brnurh WO11111 not In Met* PIfit•OliO,Itifieee of twirl* than In Ow
Voirre
(Maned) liroottra Hooves.
•••••11.1.0.16•4A4.1.
I nomatiener, Mo., Ian gory .16, 190,
bon. Waif Kr,ratitta,
Urillrvi Malin gentile,
WanhIntrIon,
Dm Hem: In reply to your teller of the lUth, I Ara wolf:4 yon a ceiry of
nn arilele of mine, written for the North American Nerwmpaper Alborg*, which
covers the eubJect of n President's inability to curry on his drab%
Thom tire my %lawn, nod if you muff to snake rote of the artkle, pin are at
liberty to du no,
Mincerely youre,
(!Signed) Maar T1WMAN,
Wineyfhtht ty Ham M. "rfilteift, lien)
There lien been tin understandable reluctance to deal with the delleatt toed sensitive problem of what we are to do when any President becomes irenael-tated ind Is unable to perform his duties.
Our Founding Fathers did not provide for such an eventuality. During the 108 years of our history under the Constitution, there have been only two OCtSi-Mous when the question arose of a President's ability to nerve, I refer to James A. Onrfleld and Woodrow Wilson. We have been fortunate, Indeed, that we have not had to face such a crisis more oft n.
Hut the Joh of the President is getting to be an almost unendurable oxtail and physical burden, and we ought not to go on trusting to luck towels* through.
We may find that we have waited too long to provide a way of meeting the situation in the event a President becomes incapacitated. There have been sag-gestions to deal with the matter through legislation. Others have propoued amending the Constitution.
However we deal with it eventually, this Is too vital a matter to be meted co hastily without the widest discussion and study. I have felt that there is always great danger In writing too much into the CoustitntIon. We most hare arab'
12	PRMIDENTIAL INABILITY
flexibility to meet changing conditions. We have already experienced the consequences of hastily amending the Constitution without adequate public discussion, as in the cases of the 18th and the 22d amendments.
In response to the many letters I have received on the subject from all parts of the country, and the world, I am taking the liberty of suggesting a way to meet this problem.
1 would like to make it perfectly clear that it is not my intention to cast reflections on anyone, or to raise any doubts about the health or condition of the President. Along with all of our citizens, I wish him good health anti a long life.
But there is a growing concern about our needs to provide against the danger of a lapse in the functioning of the Presidency and the crises that might ensue. The power of the President of the United States and his influence on the world today have grown so great this his well-being is of paramount interest to people everywhere. It is no longer a matter to be decided by political leaders and constitutional authority.
Even a minor indisposition of the President will set into motion unexpected and often unreasoning fears, such as we have recently witnessed.
The framers of our Constitution drafted a brilliant and inspired document in which they anticipated and provided for nearly all of the basic developments of our democracy. But who could fully foresee the role of the American Presidency in the kind of a world in which we now live—a role which also requires the President to be Available in person at any hour to make decisions which he alone can make and which cannot be put off?
As Vice President, I found myself acutely conscious of this problem in a personal way when I met President Roosevelt upon his return from Yalta. Up to that time I regarded the circumstances of an incapacitated President as an academic problem In history, such as was posed by Presidents Garfield and Wilson.
After the first shock of seeing President Roosevelt, I tried to dismiss from my mind the ominous thoughts of a possible breakdown, counting on his ability to bounce back from the strains and stress of office. After Yalta, President Roosevelt continued to carry on with sustained energy and alertness—until suddenly called by death.
From the day I succeeded to the Presidency, I have been thinking about the needs of an act of legislation to provide machinery to meet the emergency of a President's disability.
Shortly after taking office, I considered setting up a commission to study the problem and make recommendations. But in the midst of war and during the period of postwar reconstruction we were preoccupied with more immediate and urgent matters.
I therefore chose instead to recommend to the Congress a change by statute of succession to the Presidency from the Cabinet to the Congress in the event the Nation was without a Vice President. Up to that time the Secretary of State was next in order of succession. I did not think that a Cabinet officer—who is not elected by the people—should succeed to the Presidency, which is an elective office. The Speaker of the House, who is, in fact, the top-ranking elected public official after the President and the Vice President, is now under the new law next in succession.
This, however, does not meet the problem when a President is unable to perform the duties of his office.
I suggest, therefore, that the following proposal may provide us with a workable solution:
1. When a President is stricken with an Illness, raising the question of his ability to carry out the duties of his office, there should come into being a Committee of Seven composed of representatives of the three branches of the-Government. This Committee should consist of the Vice President, the Chief-Justice of the United States, the Speaker of the House, and the majority and minority leaders of both the House of Representatites and the Senate. This Committee would select a board of leading medical authorities drawn from top medical schools of the Nation. This medical board, thus chosen, would then make the necessary examinations presenting their findings to the Committee. of Seven. Should the findings of the medical board indicate that the President Is unable to perform his duties, and that he is, in fact, truly incapacitated and-not merely stricken with a transitory illness, then the Committee of Seven would so inform the Congress. Congress then would have the right to act, and' by a two-thirds vote of the full membership declare the Vice President as President.
PRVII DNNT1A I. INABILITY	13
The Vice President, designated as President, would thereupon serve out the full term of his predecessor. Should the stricken President, thus relieved, experience during this term a complete recovery, he would not be entitled to repossess the office.
Should the Congress he In adjournment or recess when a President Is In. capacitated, the Vice President, the Speaker, and Chief Justice should call a meeting of the Committee of Seven. This Committee, after receiving the tried!. cal findings, would have authority to call Congress into special session for the purpose of declaring the Vice President as President.
2. 1Vhen n Vice President succeeds to the Presidency and leaves the office of the Vice President vacant, the last electoral college should be called Into session by the new President for the purpose of selecting and declaring a new Vice President. I would recommend that In every instance where a Vice President succeeds to an unexpired term of a President the electoral college be convened to choose a new Vice President.
By this procedure I think we would be able to ensure the proper continuance of the functioning of the Presidency and, at the same time, protect the. Nation's paramount Interests through the full exercise of the checks and balances of our free democratic Institutions.
I suggest procedure along these broad general lines could be enacted Into law by statute. If necessary, these provisions could be framed into a constitutional amendment.
Senator KEFAUVER. Senator Langer, do you wish to make any comment on the subject at the present time?
Senator LANOER. I do not, except to say I think we ought to go into the matter very completely and clearly. It is a matter of great importance and I think we ought to take all the time necessary to do 11.7 good job.
Senator ICEPAITVER. I know the Senator's feelings about it, and I know his contribution to the thinking on this subject will be most valuable.
Senator Dirksen, do you wish to make any comments or observations?
Senator DIRKSEN. Mr. Chairman, I think my comments would be rather in the nature of questions, and my first question is this: Is it your judgment that if this matter were to be handled by statute rather than constitutional amendment, this particular subcommittee should proceed with the statutory application or statutory remedy for this condition, on the theory that we might very likely decide that wo could handle it by statute rather than by amendment? That is a jurisdictional question.
Senator KEFAuvr.s. Yes.
Senator DIRKSEN. And I do. not know whether or not this subcommittee would have authority to go ahead with it.
Senator KEFAUVER. Of course, on the question of whether the problem can be handled by legislation or whether it will require a constitutional amendment, that is one of the subjects that we will have to have hearings on and thrash out.. It is a serious subject.
I have spoken to Senator Eastland with reference to this very problem, and I feel that he wants this subcommittee to have hearings and make recommendations or reports either in the field of a joint resolution for a constitutional amendment or legislation, in other words, to handle the whole subject.
Senator DmsssN. Now my second question is this: In view of the statement made by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court that it was their desire, after conferring on the matter, that the Court, not be considered in this as an agency or as individuals that should share
22324-58-----2
14	P8M11MENTIAL INABILITY
in this responsibility, do we proceed front the outset on the theory that we eliminate the Court at once in any consideration of the bills that aro before us, because I thought the Court was pretty explicit that they wanted to preserve that separation of powers and therefore felt among themselves that they should not be included?
Senator KErAvviiii. I think it would be well at this point to place
in the record the letter from the Chief Justice of the United'	States
of January 20, 1058, to Congremman Kenneth 11. Treating. Also following that, a statement by Representative Keating as to his attitude, and I think this is important because he has been ono of the leading members of the House Judiciary Committee which has been very interested in this proposal. As Senator 'Allison says, the Chief Justice apparently feels that the Court should not be brought into this matter at all. I would say that if we, as a committee, felt, and if the Congress agreed with us, that the Court should be given some responsibility, then I think we should net. accordingly, but I am certain this committee and the Senate also will take into consideration, in making that determination, the feeling of the Chief Justice and of the members of the Court that they should not actively participate. But I am certain, of course, thfit if in the logic of our legislative body or in a constitutional amendment they were given sonic responsibility, they would fulfill it. That is Inv idea.
(The letter and statement referred to above are :w follows:)
SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES,
Washington, D. O., January 20, 1958.
ROIL KENNETH B. KEATINO,
Member of Congress,
Washington, D. O.
MY Dr..ts Ma. CONORESSUAN: During the time the subject of inability of a President to discharge the duties of his office has been under discussion, the members of the Court have discussed generally, but without reference to any particular bill, the proposal that a member or members of the Court be Included In the membership of a Commission to determine the fact of Presidential inability to act.
It has been the belief of all of us that because of the separation of powers in our Government, the nature of the judicial process, the possibility of a controversy of this character coming to the Court, and the danger of disqualification which might result in lack of a quorum, It would be inadvisable for any member of the Court to serve on such a Commission.
I realize that Congress is confronted with a very difficult problem, and if it were only a matter of personal willingness to serve that anyone in the Government, If requested to do so, should make himself available for service. However, I do believe that the reasons above mentioned for nonparticipation of the Court are insurmountable.
With best wishes, I am,
Sincerely,
EARL. WARREN,
Chief .Justice.
STATEMENT OF REPRESENTATIVE KENNETH B. KEATING
(REPUBLICAN, NEW YORK)
CHIEF JUSTICE WARREN OPPOSES MEMBERS OF COURT ON PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY COMMISSION IN LETTER TO REPRESENTATIVE KEATING
Representative Kenneth B. Keating (Republican, New York), senior Republican member of the House Judiciary Committee and of its Special Subcommittee on Presidential Inability, today released the text of a letter from Chief Justice Earl Warren commenting on the inclusion of Supreme Court Justices on a proposed Presidential Inability Commission. In his letter, the Chief Justice said
PRIAM:NUM, INABILITY	15
that all mombers of the Court believe, fora number of "Insurmountable" reasons, that it would be "Inadvisable" for any member of the High Court to serve On such a group.
Said Mr. Keating: "in the light of the Chief Justice's letter, It is apparent we should not press for Inclusion of members of the Supreme Court on such a Commission, as I have proposed. I regret this, but certainly respect the wisdom and reasoning of the Chief Justice's views.
"All Nude now agree that the Commission plan is best. lip to now that has fees the main hurdle. All other proposals have been abandoned or are not being pressed. The only problem left to be surmounted is the specific makeup of such a group. I believe we will be able to iron out this delall and bare a proposal ready for consideration soon by the House."
Senator KEFAVVER. I might ask the Senator from Illinois what he thinks about it..
Senator Dnixszx. I always respect the opinions and judgments, certainly the personal opinions of members of the Court, with reference to a matter of this kind, since it does involve bringing a coordinate branch of govermnent into the picture, exercising some responsibility. I believe I can understand rather fully how the members of the Supremo Court. come to the conclusion which they. reached.
It does not mean, of course, that Congress cannot legislate and bring time Court into the picture if it so desires, but a number of these bills do, of course, embrace the Supreme Court and give it some responsibility. It would minimize the number of bills and also the ground to be covered, if the subcommittee agreed at the outset that they would respect the Court's wishes and decide that they would follow along in another direction.
Senator KarAuvra. Do you wish to express nn opinion about. the !Witter at this time, Senator Langer
Senator LANOER. I have a very firm opinion. I think the Court should be included, especially the Chief Justice. Ho is a man who gets a lifetime appointment. He could not possibly have any personal interest in the selection of the President. I think he ought to be in it.
Senator KIWAUVER. Then your feeling is that while we think deeply and give very serious consideration to the attitude of the Chief Justice and of the other members of the Court, that we should go on with our hearings, and taking that into consideration, still legislate according to how we feel about the matter.
Senator LA NOE% Let. the Chief Justice testify if he feels strongly about it.
Senator ICErAtrvzii. I think it might be well to read his letter to Mr. Keating.
(The letter referred to above was read at this point.)
Senator DIRKSEN. Actually, Mr. Chairman, if the country were confronted with the real question of disability, the ultimate determination would essentially be a political one. I do not believe that you -could disassociate it from its political character as such, and I think the Court must certainly.have had that in mind when it undertook to render this informal opinion to Congressman Keating.
Senator KEVAUVER. Yes.
Senator DIRKeEN. Now, I have another question, Mr. Chairman, and that is this: I am sure you are quite familiar with the rumors and the speculations in the press over, a considerable period of time that there was no disposition on the part. of this session of Con-
NOW DNNTIAL INAMITY
gross to actually do anything about this disability problem. Certainly no member of the 1011(101131111) on either side of the aisle, and insofar as I know, no Member of the Senate has ever made a statement of that kind, but I am sure you are familiar with rho fact that these speculations have been very rife. 'I'ho reason I bring It up Is this. As ono who sits in on the Tuesday morning conferences, I know of the active and lively interest that the President, has in it. Ho Is completely uninhibited in diseiRsing it, and discussing himself in relation to this question of I imbility, mid he is anxious that something be &lie about. it. Now we could go through all the motions and henr sr lot of
witsu	and (lien let our efforts die on rho vine. Obviously, we can-
not control the action of the entire Senate or the !louse, but I limit my inquiry only to the subcommittee, whether or not it is our in-Nation to earnestly and diligently go through with this matert try to find an acceptable proposal and submit it to the full committee with a recommendation that it go on the Senate calendar for notion.
Senator KAMM:1h 1 can amire the Senator from Illinois that insofar as I am coneerned, and having talked with other members of the subcommittee, I feel that the same hi (rue with the other members, that we want to go into this matter thoroughly and conseientiously, try to report a resolution or bill or both to meet the problem and deal with it in this session of Congrm. I have heard the rumors that no action was going to be taken in this session of Congre.ss. I think they emanated largely from the House of Representatives, but. I do umbrstand from Congressmon Colley and al-so from Congressman Keating that they expect action in the House of RopmentativeN too. It. should be pointed out that the work of this committee will be considerably expedited if the very voluminous hearings, and letters anti opinions contained in those hearings, in rho l louse of Remisenta-tires wore considered by this committee, and we will get copies and see that they are made available. They have had lengthy hearings, as we all know, on the subject,
Soutar D1RKSEN. Mr. Chairman, I have nothing more except to say I know of your lively interest in this matter. I think Icon bespeak my own. I know that Senator Langer has a sustained interest, and I know from the observations that our distinguished friend from Wyoming has made on the floor and elsewhere from time to time that ho has not only an acute, but a very sustained interest in the matter, so that that would add up to the determination of this subcommittee that we try to find the proper proposal and move it on to the full committee in the hope that we can also move it to the Senate floor for action during thepresent session.
Senator (MAHONEY. That is the general sentiment that I find in dealing with the matter.
Senator KEFATIVER. Before we start with Senator O'Mahoney and Dr. William Y. Elliott—Dr. Elliott is the head of the Department of History at Harvard University.
Senator LANOER. Mr. Chairman, before we start„ my ideas on this matter are that I believe we should leave this entire matter of succession to the Supreme Court. You take, for example, a short time ago in the State of Rhode Island the question of who was to be Governor was left to the Supreme Court of Rhode Island, and to the supreme court alone. Here are nine men appointed for life. I think they would be entirely disinterested. In my opinion at least it would
Pit 1.141 Iti:WriAl, MA1111.171'	17
be the most advisable way to handle the entire situation, and I just throw it before the commit tee for what it may be worth.
Senator l(r.rAvvr.a. Yes, sir. We are glad at• this time to get your opinion about it, Senator Langer. Since we have many bills hero and many opinions, I know we will listen to ail of them with open tninds and try to arrive at the ono that we feel will meet the situation best, Inking into consideration also the fact that, the Chief Justice end the Justices feel they should not participate. Ihtt that should not be c01 le 1 MI ye in my opinion.
Now before we start with our first, witness, I have already put in the record it letter from former President Truman to Inc dated- January 10, in which he attaches a copy of a brief article that he has written on the subject which has been printed, which sets forth his views. Also
letter. of January 20, front the former President of the United States, Herbert Hoover, in which lie sets forth his views on how this matter should lets handled. Would you like to }liken them read ?
Sta tutor I JA NOR. Coilld we littV0 I boOree's letter read
Senator KErAtIven. Mr. Smithey, will you rend his letter?
Senator IJANnER. I am familiar with former President Truman's letter. 1 urn not familiar with President Hoover's letter.
Mr. Sturrnar. The letter is addressed to the chairman, Senator Ka fativer.
MY DRA It 8 g NA.TOR : I have received your kind note requesting my vlewa on the proposed bills you sent me.
I assume that the question is solely the method of determining the "Inability" of the President "to discharge the powers and duties of his °Mee," and contained in it else the method of determining the "removal of disability."
All questions of succession seem covered by article 11, section 1, paragraph IS of the Constitution, and therefore legislation on this subject seems to me On ItOtO11/48
1. There seems to bo some question as to whether remedy can be found by statutory law or must be through constitutional amendment. The Congress will need to decide whether the above-mentioned section In the Constitution would be sullicient authority for a statutory solution.
'2. It seems to me that the method of determining "inability" or "recovery" requires consideration of the spirit of the separation of powers In the Government and.certain traditional practices which hare become fixed in our national life during the past 150 years.
8. The President and Vice President are elected as the chosen leaders of a political party with declared mandates, principles, solutions of issues, and prom- ises to the people.
4. The Congress, in ono or both Houses, is often controlled by an op Mon political party, and thus by those who are, In practice, mostly opposed to the mandates or promisee upon which the President and Vice President are elected by the people. •
5: Alt of which leads me to the generalization that a President's inability to serve or his possible restoration to office should be determined by the leading ofilciAls in the executive branch, as they, are of the party having the responsd-billtles determined by the election.
O. I believe that a simple amendment to the Constitution (or possibly statutory law) could provide or a ,commission made up from the executive btanch to make the determinationcrequired. I do not suggest that the Individual persons be named but that the departments or agencies be enumerated, whose chief official or head should be a member of such a commission. The number 'could well be limited to not lesittban 7 and not more than 15 such heads of departments or agencies. • There could be a further provision that they should seek the advice of a panel of experienced physicians or surgeons. • •
I cannot conceive of any circumstance when such a defined body of leader* from the executive branch would act in these circumstances otherwise than in
the national interest.	• -	• •
Yonr 
(Signed) -Huse= HOOTER.
18	PRESIDENTIAL INTAMMTY
Senator NErmicsu. We had asked the Attorney (lenerni of the United States to be the first witness, but because of other connnittee beatings and the fact that ho was up hove yesterday for confirmation, he has asked to have his appearance put cif until next week. Wo are very fortunate today to have two distinguished witnesses. First, one of No great constitutional lawyers of the Congress end of the country, for whom we all have the highest, respect, Senator Joseph O'Malionoy, and, second, Dr. William Y. Elliott, whom I will introduce and give more background on later on.
Senator (Mahoney, you ere the first witness.
Senator OlfAliONFIY. Mr. Chairman, when you started that intro-
duction if started to lean back comfortably to listen to Professor	t.
T did not recognize myself.
Mr. Et.r.urrr.	/ am not entitled to senatorial courtesy, bid I ant
much gratified that you are the leadoff man.
Senator O'lligtitostr.v. This was not senatorial courtesy at all, sir. Senator KEFAUVER. I am certain that all the members of the committee will value very highly your deep thinking about this problem.
STATEMENT OP HON. JOSEPH C. O'MAHONEY, 'UNITED STATES
SENATOR PROM THE STATE OP WYOMING
Senator O'MAtioNEv. Mr. Chairmen, first let me say I presented my amendment yesterday and discussed it on the floor of the Senate. I ask that the remarks which were made yesterday, and which appear in the Congressional Record as available this morning, be made a part of this record. I do not propose to rend them into the record of this subcommittee.
Senator lcsr.turse. Without objection, they will be printed following your testimony here.
'Senator O'NfAnoNsc. I will try to sinnmarize briefly the considerations which have moved me in this matter. First, I am prompted to refer to the statement of former President Hoover. Of course, one must give a great deal of weight and consideration to the expressions of those who- have held these positions. Mr. Hoover- was President. He was not Vice President. Mr. Truman was both Vice President and President. I have given this consideration for a long time, and I find myself in disagreement with the principal thought expressed by Mr. Hoover, that the choice should be made by a. political party. I think it is in error to say that the President and Vice President are actually the choices of a political party. We have of course developed the bipartisan system in the United States, but when the Constitution was drafted, the thought was that both the President and the Vice President should be selected by presidential electors in the several States, voting separately in the several States, so that the choice would fall not upon anybody nominated by a party but upon the man whom the electors felt was best qualified to lead the Watson. As you all know, of course, as the Constitution was. first. written the man who had algisecond 1asgs4t,vote in the eleetoral.eollegeArsearue.tlte Vice President, though he was originally a eandidate,foiRitfeidoinf. If there were not a majority, then the election was thrown into the House of Representatives.
The first order of succession has been removed by amendments. Now the nominees for President and Vice President run separately,
Pit FAIDEN TIA I. INN] ILITY	19
and both are, of courstOthosen by the electoral college, but it still winning the eonstitntional law that if there is a lark of a majority in the electoral college, the choice falls into the House of Representatives, so that the Constitution us it. now rends recognizes the right of the elected representatives of the people in their States end in their districts to make this very responsible choice for the executive lender of the country, the Chief Executive Officer. I see no reason to deviate from that principle. I have read the amendment by Congressman Keating, which I think carries out the thought of femme!. President Hover. It would have the members of the Cabinet make the select ion.
Now, the members of the Cabinet, having been appointed by the President, are under obligation to the President mid cannot, be expected to exercise a free thought in a matter of succession. If the President should decide thnt despite his disability he did not want to retire,. the members of the Cabinet would not be likely to go against his thnking. I was here in Washington as n secretary of a Senator when Woodrow Wilson became ill.
I remember distinctly how his illness came about. It was in the State of Colorado. Ile went to Pueblo. There the people had gathered in great numbers to greet him, but he had planned to make only a very, brief statement because he was suffering very severe nervous strain as a result of his labors in Paris and of the_great pressures that were upon him, and he entered the meeting. The ovation which he received was so great that he decided to abandon the plan to make only a brief statement. Ile delivered the very best effort that he could. It was a strikingly important and eloquent message, but he suffered a stroke thereafter, and for months he was unable to hold any meeting with his Cabinet members.
The Vice President then was Thomas R. Marshall,. and, like Chester Alan Arthur, who was Vice President under Garfield, Marshall made no attempt to take over the duties became of the disability of the President. Ile was very modest about it, just like Chester Alan Arthur under Garfield. 'But Wilson was filled with the determination to bring about the League of Nations. That is why he was engaged on that trip. I remember the words of his speech in Pueblo that night when he spoke of the fact that he, as President of the United States, had sent the fighting men of America into the war, and many of them had died. lie said:
Yet the mothers of many of these American soldiers who perished in that war. because I asked the Congress to declare war, have rallied to my support now. It is because of the great desire of the people and of my desire to bring peace to the whole world.
Now that determination was so strong that he would not himself give any concept to anybody succeeding him. Thepreeedent had been set that the Vice President would succeed as President, though there is nothing about that in the Constitution. And so Wilson, believing that he could recoVer, and not wanting to step aside lest he would not be able to carry on this great objective, would not tolerate that thought. And this was evidenced by the, fact that when the Secretary of State, Mr. Lansing,. called the Cabinet without consulting Wilson, he was requested to resign. That is, I think, evidence of the pressures of which I speak that would be bearing down upon members of the
20	PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY
Cabinet. They are the liersonal choices of	presiding officer, the
Chief Executive, the President. They would not be free, in my opinion, to render a decision that might be essential in the public interest. It might easily be absolutely necessary to the life of the Nation that the Office of President be tilled by an Acting President so that we could be protected in some great international crisis. It should not, in my opinion, be loft to the decision of the members of the Cabinet.
Now the suggestion has been made by another amendment that has been presented here that the choice be made by the United States Supreme Court, As I recall, in one of the very earliest Congresses of the country, a bill was passed, a pension bill, to pension veterans of the Revolutionary War. It provided that the members of the Supreme Court should decide the facts as to whether or not the pensioner was entitled. The Supreme Court said they would not obey the law because theirs was the judicial function of the Government to pass upon cases, and it most be remembered that the Constitution says that the function of the courts is to deal with cases. That means litigated cases. It does not mean that Congress can push off on the Supreme Court the determination of some legislative duty.
Now, the issue here, I agree with Mr. Hoover, is solely one of the disability of the President, Yet the article of the Constitution, article I or article II I—
Senator KEFAUVER, Article II, section 1, clause 6.
Senator °MAHONEY. Clause 6, that is right. This clause provides in very simple language that when any of these four occasions develop, the resignation, the death, the removal, or the disability of the Presidents and the President is unable to discharge the powers and duties of the office, "the same shall devolve upon the Vice President."
Senator ICEPAuvr.a. I think it would be a very good idea to print following the printing of the bills, and I will so order in the record, article II, section 1, clause 6 of the Constitution to which Senator O'Mahoney has referred, and also the present succession bill passed in 1948. I think they should be printed there for reference.
(None.—The material referred to is printed on pp. 8, 9 of the hearing.)
Senator KEFAIIVER. Will you proceed, Senator (Mahoney f
Senator O'MAHoNEY. The clause reads like this :
ARTICLE II, SECTION 1, CLAUSE 0
In case of the removal of the President from office, or of his death, resignation, or inability to discharge the powers and duties of the said office, the same shall devolve on the Vice President and the Congress may by law provide for the case of removal, death, resignation, or inability both of the President and Vice Presi- dent, declaring what officer shall then act as President, and even such officer shall act accordingly until the disability be removed or a President shall be elected.
Now it is clear that the authors of that clause were thinking solely of an Acting President. There is no provision in the Constitution anywhere for the Vice President to take a second oath of office. He takes his oath of office when he is inaugurated as Vice President, and when he does so, then he is qualified as Vice President. Then one of the duties he is to perform is to assume the duties and poweraof the office of the Presidency.
Senator KEPAITVER. And yet, Senator 07ifahoney, have not all of our Vice Presidents taken the oath of office of President--
PitriiIIMN'flAi. INABILITY	21
Senator 011,tiloivey. I was going to come to that in a moment,. I wanted to show first that this clause which we now read was the work of the Committee on Style of the Constitutional Convention. When the Convention was finished with its work and satisfied that it was about, to adopt a Constitution, there was appointed this Committee on Style, the purpose of which was to dress it up in the best language possible, but they had no authority whatsoever to change any of the provisions of the Constitution. Their duty only was to make it a better literary document. So wo must refer to the provisions of the Constitution as it went to the Committee on Style. This was proposed by the delegate Pinckney.
It reads as follows, speaking of the President:
In case of removal as nforesaid, death, absence, resignation, or Inability to discharge the powers and duties of his office, the Vice President shall exercise those powers and duties until another President be chosen or until the inability of the President be removed • • •.
The Legislature may declare by law what officer of the United States shall act as President in case of the death, resignation, or Inability of the President and Vise President, and such officer shall act accordingly until such disability be removed or a President shall be elected.
So it was clear that, as the provision went to the Committee on Stylel it was designed to make an Acting President in the case of disability of the President, and an Acting President in the case of the disability of both the President and the Vice President.
Now did the Committee on Style order that! My interpretation is "No." The reason that I say "No" is not only because the Pinckney resolution is couched in the language in which it appears, but because at that time in the Colonies the lieutenant governor or the official next in lino did not become governor. He became acting governor. And it is still the case in the States so far as I know. Certainly it is the case in Wyoming and in other States with which I have been familiar.
But the strange precedent came about by reason of ono of the odd historical facts that occur from time to time. In the year 1840 Van Buren had been the successor of Andrew Jackson. The Whig Party resisted the election of Van Buren, and they sought to obtain a candidate whom they could nominate to capture the imagination of the people. They selected William Henry Harrison. He won a great victory over the Indians in the Battle of Tippecanoe. Ire was county clerk m a county in Indiana at the time of the nomination, but he did win; he had won the victory. They did not draw up any political platform. They made no pledges. They pointed out no policy. The Whigs were running on the accumulated dissidence and disapproval, let me say, or disaffection that had arisen with respect to some of Andrew Jackson's policies and personality and some of the activities of Van Buren.
So in order to gather in all of these dissident factors, the Whig Convention went to John Tylerl a Democrat of the State of Virginia, who did not agree with everything that Andrew Jackson stood for or everything that Van Buren stood for. He ran on the ticket and they were both elected.
You all know that Harrison died within a month, precisely a month I think after he was inaugurated. History records that a message was sent to John Tyler by the Cabinet, Now I am talking about the Cabinet again, and this was a Cabinet headed by Daniel Webster.
't.tam.u.t suet uopumsuoa eql uatiet SUM. etuus	•alcsa papaa eq;
emaae; ogle saiumpuira eq; Jo; 910A. ;sum lnq uopeaeslp ou %tug Huge saolaeleeto ;top puu lioltuq ell; uo aueddu (lugs mamsa.la eau eq; puu luaptseid .1o; sa)uplpuua eq; ;o sauna eq; mq4 annbe.; mou gaols Sustu puu luorininsuo0 eq; tul Jam puap u aelioa piaopate eq; eputu Sag; ;umiak'. eau puu moms-am eq4 asooy pamum eidckld eq; esnuaaa
apload eq; lo luettuaanoli u aq	Sle)(1( *moat eq ;HA 4( nq Qo.t.ta 110
ww; pans aq )ou luta11 •aq 04 Slow, sl luatutue.too 410 aallaq aq; qmp Jo wuuouojiatt 41011; puu s.laawo 01(1 puu upload 04; 1100.11)aq em;
eat uollua.s404U4	01(4 puu 'upload-01u ao; puu 'aldoad at() Sq laidoad
all jo luau4uJuou u oq o; papuon4 sum s!(4 poi; e.talla9. liu 301
luaso.td0.4 aol() tlopot rajoupg, Qq; JO oitioad 044 jo ao(011.) 04) 000 mato° au, .04u4s. 0114;o eidood oto lits Jo exoy 0114 asl.nolll 0.tu ‘oluis opol.n Q4 au; paloola eau Ogat sonipplosa.015.1 estop ,(1.00Ksavi110d 0801() IOW ‘samis 0mpod.30.4. .11041 JOO1(100(1 011) JO 0,10110 OM WU Ii01111S LIMO .1104(1 111 s.101111108 poi
'Ralik papa oil Jo °plod 010 Liu	uasoqa	aleoAt .01(11.mil 044
Imo miquo0 14 imp motor( QQ.Inap aasaal u ;sat Spy) wealittoo 941 1:k4mis 044 JO 00004 01(4 JO flit jo 8040.i A'4 uosoy 0.10 olim motutiamou
041 .1" 81111.411" S111" 04) 0.111 1110111''''.1a "1.1 °ID (11111 A0)"1:i 101111A
044 jo 111014sa.11i 010 11I1/1 10/7404 1011 t;11	411101110110 0M4 .11101 11111
001sg1011110,1 A.1111 111 7111010(1 11111 140011 (11111 101114110 al(( 11111110(40( 100 '‘0011
1410111.0 S4111(pis!P	op 141114 041 my tioputto oto Jo
N1111.111 S.104 11111	jo 01111 al410u1,11043 %qv	moN:
lauppo 011 1 Rq X01041 41) 4.111 Ip0100,4 .101.4	uompuoo Sam
0rll 0111111111 1101 1,01001 011 011 (4110.10 0,401 I 'ON 1011 0,10.11	ji	•;0111,11
pm( fuommi JSIOO .10.10 folio till OS111110041 1111010111.110.‘000lO III tiltlpHp 11111 40 41.1111 4,01.101111M 00111 II! e01.101111 Hi (Him rill 0100041 otu M( 1101?010
110.111 hill'	!	nu	1.111 01 •14/11,1 01011 1 01 11110010,01 at
Ipoiti opiumall 1---palipleip S111111;00 11110111 (- -]!1)004!,!0 0Ml111114".1 000011 011 1 111,1111OSII1 111 1110111$0,1,1 oils 41 pip 111(11.1(111m1 v1 II svolotiiamatt 111(1
11011.iugosipt .11) ol tEl	to(al) 011 411 II II;10sui11 01).104.k..111 104 mop
Told 011 I .104 1111116S101111 tif It	'1105010,1,01)Sisitorioffloal '(1,141101004!AAlbilopilimio.i	tEl IN Soliollitaid 04) Jo tilitlimuti 0111)11111 tkwo.im wzi
11114A11 11004 Q.4114 (110% su jo	,luoto ul 11 Ittpl)
.041141s1p 1 111101 101110 Mt 011411110
-0.01 .11(,1.10111 1011111.1011 111111 0,11u0 0:1 1 11100X0 111 111101.14 tiotiotilbwid imp jo 011!1!^1111 JIO 011.1111 II) lullllulnl ,1,11.k1 .101(1 081010041 4001110 0111 JO 101 1011
4111/ 147/41111Js114 111111 .141.141 411101 141 11011140 11111 11.1011 11111,41IM JO 111110 04 1 111 pull 14011.1111) jo osuo 041 III HIt 4101411tIlli 0:11104,111 sum, 1001111m,i1 01(1
40.1 011011,11 60011 1 1U111 0,)11100 .10.10 011101ili41.1,1 00141 1!011) 011,11 MO $1 111011
'01011 40 11 1110 041 11011111 0.1 oil 01141 mg) .1.011s .10.10 01110140,114 001,\ sAim 11(010.1 dio H) 1101 1 •1111N '11,410011 seal ON I Ho ,0111 101 sum 10014*Atidi
0,11411 HI1 110101 111111 1111 11 OW 010 1000111(11 41110 1111000.4 1 4001 S140404) .111014s0,14 tot 111 11100rc t111.11 011 111111 11011144,4 001 11O1 11 01 1110-11 011 41011111111011At 0) Oldini itA111 0r1.1 011 OH 41111 0) 11111.11 11114 f10114400
0,10111110111	VIII 1 41111$) 111 10111110, 4 011 1 111101 1411011 1111j1 10101 11111100 .1'1111
.1011110 00.1011 1 0001101111) 11110 001 11111 014)) 1,0,11110a111 111111 001110 011 1 001110 04
o6oilitifl 1011 pip 011	'101010 lotil(1110114114\% 010 101(.11 ,104 1411111 oil) JO
1111 111144 00.1140	pip (11111 40,1400110i( 11 HU* 1101.1,1, 11111	'4011)1111)1110;1,
0111) JO n011010111 011 1 411 1011 1140>•11110	1101114i111)4k% 101111K1 00,0 10111
;414111114 1/0111111 0111 JO 111‘1111100t1 11111 10V 011 1 .11011 4N.111	111(11(1
'1111.1	po-‘01041 aim 411 time
01)4111141.11141111 010	Vtipii„ Imo	S1114,4401 1atitm01111
I 1.1111 1 NI	'1 1 I.1
ellt,4114:V11,11, IS A1111,11	23
the Splinters wei desigiped tip he 1 he	iVe4 ell flit' 141sleg, iona
they were Ill	Morsel! 111,1. Iip She iteopte of the 141tiles, hut I' the
leglelef tires of IIn Slides. IIuI the peripie, wanting to have (loser
touch with Ilie Senate,	I	coeFfilefielell Intientbrot.lit fOr
04111111r 14114011ln Ilf
SO bele t%	HOW the choice rig I se.e It between these ten rinlei tom.
iiusids.	(1))	die 011111114 stunt ditiffP44; (2) ihn/ ri gpeelal erne-
missile' snail	iippoitited SO eboogel (1) flint it rtollAil tit itottil enteral-
meld	ail/pled to Ohm the I. °ogress by Inw	111,11fie Slut site-
NIM %SIMI WM1111140 Mole	what woad .1. I I01 Mott. 11.111014 111118 Io
1111%14 I hi, 0)14,01%4 Itself defensible the disidaility when the Presirleet
himself shun io.ltotowimIto it nod	fitibli to fen Ve4	Ihreerntlient
in the hawk of uppiiiiited alike ladders,
'Phis k talon care of iii the arrietalmeni !lost 1 ittoposeol yesterday,
beviiiise it, IH forrivideil that Whell	Ptemiileut, himself proelaims filu
411RM/1111y, the Tice PleAillellt alefet in nu iteling Presient, arid then
When the Vire	but the President hug tekovered, the
President Itiliex fits oilles, bilek Ogfint, ISO if the condition arms where
I here ix a sP	Iiilitp mut the Presitleot sloes wit, rerognize it, anal the
Vine l'resideol he tames Io t gas(' the issue but the fuel of tlissbility is
terogniwill I knit Ilia !ollikom fly t ewftiel imp marl declare that there is ii disability nail then the Vivo President lakes over by operation of kw.,
When i nest drafted this, I provided flint the Speaker of the House
should have	ntilliodly to call I Ile Ciaegiem to volts rowel the ritiPA ion
tier having	before it (11111111 ollieerg of flovertiment to
testify uuderortlli es Iii the nOlInter Ili Which the fltnetIons of the Presi-deney were beieg iliscluirgeil, Mit after that had been written, it
lsetnute upurettl that	81o011ter %Vila loito2.01 in line of succession Anil I Ind flint would probrility be nn improper testy of soling. So
eliminated Ilse Speaker altogether, rind the amassment as it hi before this truly vow 'nukes I be leaf ler epersil ive thiough resolution by the `011gregA, MO I Inella the eottellrtetil, resolution, not the joint !Whin thrit has In be signed by the President, operative there both in the ense of the President and of the Vice President.
If the Vice President should riot recognize the ability of the l'resi-dent to reassume this &dies, Congress could step in again,
The stfitelnent SON been made that Congress is rs ustlly a bipartisan hotly. Mr. I trowel. says something about flint :
The rtiiittems In one or boll' Ilholgea 114 often emtrolled tq an (*position poillica) purl)* nut] by thome who nre In practice mostly opposed to the mandate* or premixes mum which Ito ;'resident and The President are elected by the
profile, ell id whieh tend!!	1.• the generallzatirm that the PrsAddearfi InatAlfty
to serve or his pomitile re..htry:lon to otfiee thanid be determined tq the leading 01114.1alm of the executive brench.
'Well, Air. Chairman, that seems to me not to recognize the fait that political platforms sometimes are written only for the campaign, and the policies of a party proclaimed when it is running for ejection are
often very different from the policies of the party when it is in office and ;8 carrying on the functions of government. I have seen "outs" who were elected and became "ins" and having become an "in," I have seen them discover that, the things they thought they could do with the
Government could not be done, and I have seen them abandon the declared policies of farreaching change. And in our time I think it
24	mironovrtAla Nal'nippy
can ho said without fear of swoon' outlyullotion that there Is groat deal of Idyllist hianship in the Congreits of the United Staten now, think President. Eisenhower lien enjoyed R gl'ellt dent of blinirtisan• ship support, with support. from 1115 opposition 'may nntl opposition
from his support in pint	Tho woad dein' in tint poppet.
I think Proaltiont, lidittellitOWer wits perfectly flank and very mind in his desire to have a solution mile of Oils problem, nod I think ho nmeets this Congretts to lam un amendment and submit it to the wople.
Cengrm might easily offer two nmendments mid lot, the people chooso. We have only one authority, end that is the nutliority to prigs the resolution of nmendinent by the requisite number of votes through both houses of Congms and it must he the people of the States w in will dedtto.
And so, Mr, Chairman, I think that I have presented in brief—It is more lengthy than I expeeted to lm--•n summary of the amendment I propose,
Let me read, however, at this point, the full text of the nmondment that I have introduced,
Senator ICEVAVVER, You mean of Semite joint resolution 1411 Senator okrAlIONNY. Yes.
Senator KsrAITVER. We have ordered it 'printed in the word.
Senator O'MaitoNity. Very well, that will he sufficient, except for this point I would like to submit to questioning if there is any with respect to the direct provisions,
Stextox 1. Whenever the President proclaims that ho Is unnbio to discharge the powers and duties of his office, or whenever rho Senate rind the Housa of Representatives pass a resolution &visiting that the President Is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office, the Vice President, or If there be no Vice Prfteldent. the officer next in lino of succession to the Oleo of President u provided by law, shall be Acting President.
Sir. 2. An Acting President shall exercise the powers and duties of the office of President under this article until (1) the end of the then current presidential term. (2) such Acting President finds and prociniuts that the inability of the President no longer exists, (3) the Inability of the President IS determlned, In accordance with Section 3 of this article, no longer to exist, whichever first occur:.
Sw. 3. Whenever, during any petted in which au Acting President Is discharging the powers and duties of the office of President under this article, the Senate and the louse of Representatives pass u resolution declaring that the inability of the President to discharge the powers and duties of his office no longer exists, the Acting President shall cease to exercise the powers and duties of the office of President and the President shall exercise such powers and duties.
There is a provision which makes it clear that Congressl when the President has recovered, can prevent an ambitious Vico President from holding on when he should yield to the President, having recovered.
Section 4 is the ordinary section about the submission of ratification,
Senator KEFAUVER. Senator O'Mahoney, you have made a very good background statement and a forceful statement in support of your resolution.
May we ask you some questions/
Senator CeManoNET. Certainly.
Senator KEFAUVER. I will ask two brief questions and then yield quickly to my colleagues.
One of the principal objections to the idea contained in your resolution- and to others that leave the decision to either Congress as a
PIIK1411VitlAti INABIbITY	21i
whole, or 10 the Bow of Represent al Ives miller the proviaitoi where It melee in it Prenident when 110 ventilate for President lots It majority of the Wel oral college, In Ilan, it might, lead lo long debate, to die-
lo filibuster, to committee heariege end finding"nt a time when them In great iirgemly, and I jtint, wanted to got, your rylryry111(01191 On OM.
811111110110'MAIIONMS, Y141,
Senator RevAtiviat 'flint In a criticism that in frequently ninde,
Senator O'Mnitoner, I knew, I IMO heard of it, My ftflilWer to It in 11111 answer I hat Alexander 1 Ifiln311011 'MVO w11(111 Aaron Burr sought to, or let me nay hoped, instead Of witight, hoped to have the Bonne of llopreseniativee elect him Premident !indeed of Jefferson, Ile had run for President with the understanding that he MIN fo be (him Vlctr P1494111411111 I/111 SIN It Illipp0/101111110 Presideetinl electors, voting In the severe! States"' did not "eke not .Ire of that fact, and they both had exactly the ennui vote, 10 Burr expected to lie elected,
Now if there Was 0110 man In the whole country who had no confi-donee or faith or nny liking for Aaron Burr, it was Alexander Ilamil-toe, the leader of the Federallat Party. Ile persuaded his Yederelist inembern of the !tonne to vote for Jefferwm rather then for Burr.
Now I think that a matter of such greet importance will weigh as heavily upon the Atomiser,' of Congress now and in the future an it did then. This in a mutter of tremendous significance and responsibility, and I would nay frankly, Mr. Chairman, (lint I have noticed--I have been here for a longtime now as a secretary arid an a Senator—I have noticed that men grow under responaibility, and I have seen instance after imitative of (ho preference of Menilvre of Congress for the good of the country miller than for their own election,
I think I might well give you another illustration that I know very well.
You will recall that there wan a Senator from Texas by the name of 'Teo Bailey, a very great orator. His son was later elected to the 'louse of Itepretiontatives and wan nerving in the House of Representatives just after F. D. It. became Preaident. The younger Mr, Irailey sponsored legislation to pay a bonus to the veterans. It was during the period when Roosevelt was trying to xonomize in Government, believe it or not.
Senator lCerAuvr.e. That was in 1033 and 1034 as I remember it.
Senator 01MA IIONEY. That is'right, when the effort was being made to balance the budget. You have heard that frequently. But in any event, the House passed the bill, it came over to the Senate and the Senate passed the bill, but the President vetoed it. I remember as well as though it wore yesterday when our former colleague, Tom Connally of Texas, the Senator, against whom Bailey had been announced as a candidate in the Texas primary for the vacancy in the Senate that was about to take place, the place was to be filled again, Tom Connally voted to sustain the veto of the President. As he walked off the Senate fioor that day I was the first person, I think, to see him as he came off the floor and he said to me: 'Joe, I think I have just voted myself out of the Senate."
Well, he did not- He was renominated and reelected. I have no fear of Congress rising to its responsibility when the responsibility is as great as it is in a matter of this kind.
26	PHFAIDENTIAL INABILItY
Senator If...er,wvxn. I have forgotten the riumbor'of days involved, but in 1824 in the contest, in the House over who should be selected when the election was thrown into the House between Andrew Jackson, Crawford, John Quincy Adams, and Henry Clay, when Clay finally resigned and Adams, the third man, was selected, it took quite a lot of time and created a great deal of acrimony.
Of course; in 1870 during the Hayes-Tilden controversy they finally had to refer it to a special commission.
Senator O'MAUONEY. One of theie extra-constitutional commissions.
.Senator KEFAUVEH. But what is your answer to the proposition that this might-result in one of those kind of controversies that would make it very difficult for the Congress to settle.
Senator O'MAnoNEY. Well, I really, do not think so. I think Congress can settle the controversy more judicially than the Commission Which settled the Tilden imbroglio, may I say to the chairman. We are not dealing with perfection. The Constitution itself is one of the most perfect documents ever written,
but it. has been frequently amended. My plea, Mr. Chairman, for this amendment is based upon the fact that it lain harmony with the basic principle of popular government., not with delegated powers.
Senator Kt:mu-yea. Senator hanger, do you have some questions to ask?
Senator LINGER. I have no questions.
Senator KERAUVE. R. I know Senator Dirksen has some questions,
but one further question.	•
Your proposal is of course in the form of a joint resolution to propose a constitutional amendment, Many students of the Constitution seem to feel that article II, section 1, clause 6 gives Congress the right to legislate by statute on the subject, of the determination of disability and determination when the disability no longer exists. I would like to_ ket your view about that, Senator O'Mahoney.
Senator OlIAMINEY. Which section of the Constitution &es thatt-Senator ICEFAUVER. It is contended by some that. article II, section
Senator 011moNsy. Article II, sect ion 1, clause 6l
Senator ICEPAUVER. Clause 6; would give the Congress the right to. do, for instance, what your proposed constitutional amendment would do.
Senatoi O'MAtioNsy. Well, the vesting of power on COngress there is contained in this language:
And the Qongress may by la* provide for the case of removal, death, resignation, or inability both of the President and Vice President.
It does not. say "inability of the President or Vice President." It: sap; "both of the President and Vice President," and it seenis to me therefore that this clause eitecifically refers to the fact. When both 
of-thesees officials at. the same time are unable to discharge, it might be that the President was unable to discharge the duties because he had been removed or because he had died or because he had resigned or heeatise 'of his disability. I think that the joining of those two provisions there is an argument rather in support of my contention, which is that the constitutional fathers believed that they were providing, for an Adink President in both cases.
Senator KEFAUVER. In other words, you think that, the word "both"' there means that---
PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY
Senator OlIAHONEY; It has got to be done by constitutional amendment.
Senator KEPAUVER. Means that when there is neither a President nor a Vice PreSident, Congress then may provide for the succession As it has done.
Senator O'MAnoNsv. As it tins done.
Senator KEVAltVER. Senator Dirksen.
Senator DinKsE.N. I have only one question. This looks a little farfetched. You Could, however, conceive of a situation where you might prefer a Vice President to an Acting Vice President, and if there was some Indic-alien Of a disability, not. too marked, perhaps
OIMAittikEr. You said; "might prefer a Vice President to an Acting President"?
Senator Drank:4. To the incumbent President,
Senator O'MAITO.mEt. Yes.
Senator Dualism That while the disability might not be too marked, yet you might want to Out him on the shelf, mid you would get a resolution throtIgh' both branches of Congress. 4oW if you had topheavy majorities, it. would not be too difficult to do it -I wall serving in the Honse back in th 74th Congress when we had, I think,
a total ofMembers on cturs-sittrairirpet steel as iv rather IOW!
anced Congress for p 'tra number of, years, as u well know.
On one Occasion	en Senator McNary was the ihnitity leader
hi the Senate th	were only 17 Re	lieans in the	ate.
Senator O'M fONEY. That i right
Senator DI seSr. Theo	son raise	question is his: You
simply say, enactinen	branches."	would
infer from at that i
Senator IfAnoxE :—
Senator IRIESRN: Would y	ing a two- birds
vote in th branches?
Senato OltfAit	. I	o that.
. Senato DIRRAE B	eviden • you
will have o great 'fficulty
Senato O'MATIo EY. Itb ght tof	evident. It ought o be
real disab lity, not	)o 't ea	ty	ended disabi ty or
a disabilit over wh	any am "ti9Lis.	trying o ride
to power, rtainl . If the com	ee,fel	ould	a two-
thirds vote, would haven	ectio . In eed, I ust give ny wife
credit for haysugges	his in
Senator DIR gE Your NY	es ed th
Senator O'MA NEY. That is rig t
Senator DIRKEIEN. think she deserves to be elev b_d to the realm of statesmanship.
Senator OlIAIIONEY. 01,ras .1.1	n-een	mind, for a long time.
Senator IhaKswq. Overriding v-t-iiesdoes require a two-thirds vote. Senator OIMATiONEY. Yes, there is a lot of force to that suggestion, Senator.
Senator IhaKsurr. That is all Mr. Chairman.
Senator KEFAUVER. It should be somewhat difficult to declare disability, or define disability.
&Miter OWAHONEY. Oh, yes. It certainly should not be decided perhaps by a majority of one; so, as I Say,.I *ould have no objection lathe will of the committee in a matter of that kind.
28	Plt14110KNTIAL INABILITY
Soittque ItcpAktvgli, KRIM`	OP 11 0011141IIIII0litit 11111JOVIty4
Senator O'MAILONEV. 801111411111g 1110 'Ind i illlything
8011Att11` KEPAUVIAtt, tine ha'il'er yurlttInn.
WOYO talking it little hit ago flint in your opinion article II,
sootIou 1, 01oAlso 0, would not enable Congress by low to provide for
tho detorminntion Of disobility, and WWII	e0104‘41	0%1PII
that it trtors Only to whore both the President and the Vire limident ntm either dead or disabled.
Senator OIMattorlov, 1 think Con gross hos nirently exercised all
tho	that Won given to It III (b it 14000114 chum of clause 0 .
Sonntor KarAuvon. Hut even if there be some volitlity to the orgu-mont that this might give the Con gross the authority by kw to deal with tho ttotorminot ion of the 'pow on of illsobilit v, (limo In 110 vision In article II, wan 1, elouso 0 that would nuthorite in tiny event the giving to tho Congress the right to determine the removal of the disability.
tiotlator Oltattoway. 'Flint Is right.
KSPAVVElt, lieent1S0 reitiovnl of disability Iii not specified. Any further questions,
ort Moly are grateful to you for your cent rilmt ion.
Senator OlnlAttoNar. 'nwt( you very much, Mr. Chnirnm, for your patienee. I very much oppreeinte It.
senator KorAIIVItli. And we hope os n member of the full committee and intemted in this problem you will sit with us and port lelpoto as Hutch 118 you eon, ,Senator O'Noltoney.
Sonata O'NtAtioNtly. Thank yon. I will be happy to.
(The stotement presented by 'Senator 0'11fithoney in the Congressional 'Record in as follows;)
Paeroarn (Nmarristittemat. AMVNIIMMIT TO Mill CONOMMIN PAWN to 1)g-trionats Dispatturt Or TIM ritTOIDIV4T To DISCHAltall ins PoWits AND DUTITI oksilia ()MCC
Mr. O'Mxilosmv. Mr. President, 1 Introduce a joint resolution proposing an amendment to the Constitution of the (totted States to provide for a MelliN1 of determining disability of the Prftldent of the United Slides.
The Vier PersinVit. The joint resolution will be received nod appropriately referred.
The joint resolution (S. 3. Res. 141) proposing an amendment to the Constitution of the Untied States relating to the detertulnation of the innhIlity of the President to discharge the powers and duties of his omee, Introditerd by Mr. tr.Mahoney, was reeelved, read twice by its title, and referred to the Committee on the Jmitclary.
Mr. 0.NIAlIONVC. For the third time In the history of this Nntion, we are confronted with a situation which graphically demonstrates the ambiguity created by precedent In the Presidential succession provisions of our Constitution.
When, after baring been shot down by a disappointed ofticeseeker, President kl*Ttleld lay ill for All days and his sole act as President was his signature on an extradition paper, the country wondered If It would be constitutionally proper for the Vice President to assume the powers and duties of the President. Even the members of the Cabinet debated whether, if he did so, the President, upus reeocery. could resume the duties of his office.
When President Wilson lay seriously Ill, the victim of a severe stroke, the Nation again pondered these issues.
Now President Eisenhower, himself the unfortunate victim of heart attack, ileitis. and cerebral spasm, has called upon the Congress to settle once and for all the perplexing issues arising out of the Presidential succession in times when the President is incapacitated.
Pitir.eillinffriAti INA ilitiTY	29
„PAHA Vet PM Akt pArktAltAr MoltniltAN IOU 1P.A101 A00
We Wad Hut ItO here revIewilig ttrl.r problefn hart it not been for the prove dent emieblimlitel by VIM President /obit Tyler in Intl, when', HIM the death of i'rrxidrul IVOlivivii Henry llorrixen, lie hoisted upoto faille% the oath AN Provident of lite Holiest SPINA nod toddled n11 tOtritulte Its address him as Att. ing PromMoil rather than live Premblent,
tin hod already f ellen the oath of oaten AA rice PteAirlOht of the United Male.. There le in, loteninge In the Constitution requiring the Vire Weal. dant, mem stieceeding to the powerg and divilevi of the off ct of Provident, to hike n new mill: of rave, It wee John 'Pyler who ereetel Met pretislent, ea the OP votit, I qui cooliMehl, of n HaINCohmifileflAll of the language of the Oenstifullon,
There wore ninny In Tyteem flay who would oat seem flint he was WeeMerit, but nailer felt flint he WAN AOhie Provident, Anson g the newavapere of the any, the Her rlishurg filleeigetwer, the kiwi/aid Inquirer, and the New York 19Yruinpf Poet exprovitel that vleW, Home Alegi:here of Cearteo4 retried the opleAllon of hew they shoolit midterm hini Move limy notified hire that the erm, grtimm wns reedy for work, it was Mr. Wise of VIrglola who Wormed the Cote Ares! Mil Tyler W011111 IIlulat upon /whit regarded as the Prey&trill and, id-Ihougls ihle.vild led repot with theMoTOTAI of persons neh NA *flIdOf
Alien of OW, Vice Preirlilefit Tyler had his way, ritel erne thereafter knoven na the President.
TitirMA WAN A PuLITIVAI, NAUNSIOUSO	leurieti itonox
It ten, be of leterest to event out that Ohs lidera WAA the restfit of the fact flint Milani Henri Hutton; WAN a Whig and Tyler 11 lietnoerat, Iteration wee nemineted by the WhIg.. ad their tetreildete for President in JMO. The 411111)00n Wog comliwied without a political platform upon the part of the Whigs.
John Tyler, who find been at heist a dieeldetit Iivenneret, so for am some of the polielee of Andrew Jnekson and Marlin Van Buren ware concerned, was perounded by the Whigs to accept the nomfnetion for Vice Prolident, flow-ever, when Harrison died, the Cribhet heeded by Mullet Wonsofe, *eat a message to Mr. Tyler, at his home In Virginia, to the tried that oirfug to the regret I Able &nth of the ('resident of the United illeterv, Witham Henry Harrison, he persuaded Chief Judge Wllllgm Crotch of the CircaIt Court of the Ms-
Instead of responding to tide wattage, Tyler same hurrying to %YeahIngtort, and he persuaded Chief Judge William Crunch of the CircaIt Court of the District of Columbia to administer to him the oath of Pteeldett of the United States.
The reason behind his Inditenee upon being known as the President wes that he wan town!! that the Cabinet, appointed by Otneral Harrison, roeld attempt to direct his activities in the office of President and In discharging Ida duties end powers of that office.
Ho, refusing to be subject to the orders of the Cabinet, be took the oath u president.
CONSTITUTION OTTED IN AltOUURNTS ON 110.11I SIM Or QTITATIT011
The language of article Ii, section 1, dense 6 of the Constitution formed the basis of the arguments both pro and eon with Teepee to the right of Vice President Tyler to become more than Acting President. That part of the Censtita-tIon reads as follows:
"Article II, Section 1, Clause 0, the Constitution of the United Steles of Ameries
"In Cage of the Removal of the President from Office, or of his Death. Resignation, or Inability to discharge the Powers and Duties of the said Once, the Same shall devolve on the Vice President, and the Congress insY by Law pro-side for the Case of Removal, Death, Resignation, or Inability. both of the President and Vice President, declaring what ()nicer shall then aet as Preside**. and such Officer shall act accordingly, until the Disability be removed. or a President shall be elected."
The matter of Presidential succession first appeared in the Constitutional Convention In the draft submitted by Charles Pinckney. When the original draft of the Constitution went to the Committee on Style It coataleed two separate element
22324-58---4
30	PlifISIDENTIAI, INABILITY
dealing with Presidential succession, Although the manner of the selection of the President and the status of his successor had not been decided upon by the convention at that point, It Is interesting to note the tangling() of these two clauses,
This Is the language which went to the Committee on Style, rind which was revised solely for the purpose of attaining what the members of that committee deemed to be better literary quality in the great document which was being prepnred. I now rend the Pluckney provision:
"In ease of (the President's) removal us nforesnid, death, absence, resignation, or Inability to discharge the powers or duties of his office, the Vim President shall exercise those powers and duties until another President be chosen, or until the Inability of the President be removed.
"The Legislature may declare by law what officer of the United States shun act as President, in case of the (tenth. resignation, or disability of the President, and N'ice President; and such offieer shall net accordingly, until such disability he removed, or n President shall be elected."
Please note that in this draft the Vice President was to exercise the powers and ditties of the Owe of the Presidency as distinct from the Office itself. Also note that he was to serve until the inability of the President be removed. Further, the delegation of power to Congress was to establish what person should net in the event both the President and flee president were disabled. The Committee on Style changed this language so that it became 1 (louse instead of 2, and in so doing brought much of the confusion which now exists.
However. I believe that the primary cause of the eonfuslon was the notion of Vice President Tyler, as I have already described It, because the clause of the Constitntion as it rends refers to the "powers and ditties of the said ()Mee," and then adds; "The same shall devolve on the Vice President."
DRAFTERS OF CONSTITUTION INTENDED THAT VICE PRESIDENT 81101,t D ANNUM E DUTIEs OF THE eruct; NOT THE OFFICE ITSELF
It IR clear front the language of the Constitution itself and from what was said in the Pinckney draft that the intention of the drafters of the Constitution Was not that the 011ice should devolve upon the Vice ['resident, but that the powers and duties thereof should so devolve upon him.
The wisdom of the Founding Fathers is certainly legendary, but It is obvious that In this area nt least, it was not infallible so far as the COIDIIIIIIPO on Style Was concerned. When John Tyler established his precedent and the others of his day acceded to it, they rested their argurneut upon that part of the clause 0 which states that In case of removal of the President from his Office, or of his death or inability to discharge the duties of his Office, the same shnll devolve upon the Vice President. It was their position as I have said. that the words "the same" referred to "the said Office" rather than to the powers and duties of the said Office. Their argument may be disputed today in theory hut it is established in precedent for, since the assumption of the Office of the Presidency by Vice President Tyler, six other Vice Presidents have assumed that Office upon the death of the President. V1•7O Presidents Fillmore. Arthur, Theodore Roosevelt, Coolidge, and Truman gained Office in this manner.
It Is important to note that there are four instances in which the words "the same" apply with equal logic. First there Is removal from office; secondly, there is death; thirdly, there is resignation; and fourthly, there is inability. What devolves upon the Vice President by virtue of this clause devolves in each of these cases and the pattern having been established that it is the office which devolves upon the Vice President upon the death of the President, it is difficult to maintain today, it the Vice President were to act in the President's stead during the President's incapacity, that the Vice President had not become President. This. of course, would exclude the possibility that the President could, upon recovery, resume the powers and duties of the office of President.
This very difficulty has twice before caused conscientious Vice Presidents to refrain from assuming the powers and duties of the Presidency, although the situation then existine certainly demanded R.
ANIF.NDITENT WOULD ENABLE PRESIDENT TO RESUME DUTIES UPON RECOVERY FROM
DISARRAY!'
The purpose of my amendment, Mr. President, is to remove this ambiguity completely, and to provide that when the disability exists, particularly in days
PIIKSIDEMIAL iNADILITY	31
of great crisis, the Vice President shall, by virtue of his office and by reason of the Constitution, become the acting President, not the President. This would enable the President, who was lit and disabled, to resume his office upon recovery, and there would be no question or doubt about it.
NATION HAS SUFFERED FROM LACK OF LEADERSHIP DURING INCAPACITY or PRESIDENTS
That this Nation suffered by reason of the failure of Vice President Arthur and Vice President Marshall to assume the office of President may be inferred from the inactivity of the Presidents during their periods of incapacity. Al. lush:in has already been made to the Met that during his 80 days of illness, Meal. dent Garfield signed by ono official document, that being nn extradition paper. In President Wilson's day Ire was not able to meet with the Cabinet for 8 months. More than a score of bills became law without his signature. The Democratic Sternberg of Congress sought unsuccessfully to get his advice on certain matters then pending before the Congress. Leadership and direction were obviously Nuking.
NATioNnt, testossiiirre nr 1111: Est:corm; IS EssENTIAT,
While it was important to have leadership end direction in 1881 and in 1924), It Is doubly important to hove such characteristics today. It is fool. hardy to suppose that this country may indulge in the supposition that since the Nation has riot suffered greater tribuintion during these periods of Presidential Incepacity, It may expect to escape unscathed in a similar crisis in the future.
It is not suffielent to consider this twitter In the light of what the office moans to the United States alone. We must consider what the Office of the Presidency of the United Sloes means to the world as well, for this Nation occupies a positlen of leadership which we must maintain in order that the free institutions we revere may continue to exist.
PREHIDENT EISENHOWER HAS _ASKED CLARIFICATION OF DLTEBMINATION OF
PRESIDENTIAL. DISADILITY
We are confronted, then, both by an opportunity and by n challenge. The opportunity has been Made possible by the candor and frankness of President Eisenhower, who has stated that when you are err:dined to your bed you think about n lot of things and that one of the things he thought about was the determination of the inability of the President. His reflection caused him to request the Department of Justice to submit a proposed solution of the issue we are discussing today. Such a proposal has been submitted in the House of Representatives by Congressman Keating. It must be obvious to all that inherent In the nssumption of Rue)] a proposal by the President Is the idea that the present provisions of the Constitution tire inadequate in this regard. If they are inadequate, the paramount question is what new remedy shall be invoked by which to determine the inability of a President.
This, then. is our challenge. ‘Ve must determine the critical question of who, or better yet, what body, shall determine when a President Is incapacitated, and when he has recovered sufficiently to perform the duties of his office.
SEVERAL. METHODS HAVE BEEN PROPOSED
The President has suggested that the Cabinet be the agency to determine the ability of the President to discharge the functions of his office.
Senator Fuibright has submitted another proposal under which the Supreme Court would snake such a determination after submission of the issue to the Congress.
The chairman of the Judiciary Subcommittee on Constitutional Amendments, the distinguished senior Senator from Tennessee, Mr. Keftinver, has authored two proposals, one of which would require the appointment of a commission to determine the issue. The other proposal of the chairman would leave deter-minatton of that question to await the enactment of a statute following authorization for such procedure.
While I do not desire in any manner to deprecate the efforts of any other person who has seriously considered this matter, I am convinced that each of them represent certain difficulties which I shall specify in a moment. I believe that the proper approach to this prohleM would be to vest the determination of this issue in the Congress of the United States. The President is the only Federal
32	13111,141DIONTIAl. IN AIIILITY
offieer elected by all tho pcoelo of all the Stoles. The Members of Congress ore elected by the people of tho several States and eongn‘esional districts.
CONOREA8 CAN 10:87 RKVILICAENT TIIP: WILL 01.' TOE reoetx IN THIN LIATTY.11
We are, of course, dealing with the highest elective Mile° which Is in the
power, of tho people of the United States to bestow on any matt. To inter-Pole the Somme Court, or the members of the Cabinet between the people of the Ilelied Steles and the Office of President would seem to me to vlo• late the spirit of the Constitution as we know It. The determination of tho Inability of the President of the United Steles must be pubilely accepted mid
the vehicle calculated to gain public uceeptaitee most readily, It seems to MIN Is the vehicle to he adopted. TIIPIV Is no group, nor could there ho any individual, who represents tt better cross section of public opinion limn the Congress of the 1?oltn1 States. Their decision would be less apt to be motivated by temporary gain then any other agency for tiny such temptation would ho tempered by the knowledge that they would soon have to stand accountable before the people et the United States in free and open elections. There is no such cheek existent so far as the members of the Supreme Court or the Cabinet are concerned, and while I would not immito bad faith to anyone oho might occupy those offices, I am deeply conscious of the fact that we are dealing with the Constitution and that we must, therefore, examine all eontingenclee. it has been argued that the members of the Supreme Court, or the members of the President's Cabinet, could be removed by Impeachment in the event that they were unfaithful in the task which they would be called upon to perform, ehould the President be incapacitated. Impeachment is a difficult proposition, rot lightly to be considered, and often fettered with political implications of the greatest magnitude. The check which impeachment affords, therefore, is hanily as formidable as the check represented by the ballot box.
With this in mind, I would like to review ,,onto of the provisions which I have written tubs the amendment which I now ofren
I ask unanimous consent that the text of the joint resolution may be printed at length at this point in the Record.
There being no objection, the joint resolution was ordered to be printed in the Record, as follows:
"Resolved by the Renate end Route of Representatives of the 'United Stales of Anscrieu tot Congress assembled (Itco-thirds of each Rouse concurring therein), that the following article Is proposed as an amendment to the Constitution of the United States, which shall be valid to all intents and purposes as part of the Constitution when ratified by the legislatures of three-fourths of the several States:
"home et
1. Whenever the President proclaims that he Is unable to discharge the powers and duties of Ms office, or whenever the Senate and the Rouse of Representatives pass a resolution declaring that the President is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office, the Vice President, or if there be no Vice President, the officer next in line of succession to the office of President as provided by lav•, shall be Acting President.
"Sao. 2. An Acting President shall evercise the powers and duties of the office of President tinder this article until (1) the end of the then current presidential term, (2) such Acting President finds and proclaims that the inability of the President no longer exists, (3) the inability of the Preatdent is determined, in accordance with section 3 of this article, no longer to exist, whichever first occurs.
"Ste. 3. Whenever, during any period in which an Acting President is discharging the powers and duties of the office of President under this article, the Senate and the House of Representatives pass a resolution declaring that the Inability of the President to discharge the powers and duties of his office no longer exists, the Acting President shall cease to exercise the powers and duties of the office of President and the President shall exercise such powers and duties.
"Sao. 4. The Congress may by law provide for the case where either or both Houses of Congress are not in session, declaring what officer or officers shall convene such House or Houses for the purpose of enabling them to perform the duties conferred upon them by this article.
"Sae. 5. This article shall be inoperative unless it shall have been ratified as an amendment to the Constitution by the legislatures of three-fourths of the several States within 7 years from the date of its submission."
PitliSIDIISTIAL INABILITY	33
Mr. Maim s. Mr. President, will the Senator yield?
Mr. WMAIIONNY. I yield.
Mr. thexer.N. I certainly would not be offensive to my friend from Wyoming. I share his concern about former President Tyler's confusion. But I am wondering what has happened to the 8-minute rule. has it become a casualty this afternoon? We aro in the morning hour, I admonish my colleague.
Mr. 011A11088Y. Mr. President, I regret that I was not close enough to bear what my friend from Illinois said.
Mr. Masses. Wo are in the morning hour, and I wondered whether the 13.minute rule had become a casualty.
Mr. 011A110/1/sY, The 8.minute rule has frequently been a casualty in the progress of these matters, Senators have been very indulgent, the Senator from Illinois particularly. He is always kind and Indulgent toward me. I express my public appreciation to him now, as I have done ou many occasions before. I now con]e to the analysis of the proposed amendment, and then I shall be finished.
ONLY PRIVIDOISTIAL DISABILITY 18 DRAW WWII IA ALIENDIMICT
My Joint resolution, I should explain, deals only with the question of the inability of the President. I' does not attempt to repeal article II, section 1,
clime 8, insofar ns that article relates to the death, resignation or removal of the President. My resolution provides that the President may himself proclaim that he is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office and that when he does so, the Vice President shall succeed him as Acting President. It also provides that In the event the President does not, or cannot, make such a proclamation, the Senate and the House of Representatives may pose a resolution declaring that he Is unable to discharge the duties and powers of his office, and the Vice President may thereupon assume those duties. I have required in my resolution that the President proclaim, rather than announce, his disability, for a proclamation Is a more formal act which is widely publicised and disseminated and which would seise to ex the date, the time, and the place of such action so as to avoid, as near as possible, litigation which may result.
y0101888 00111.0 Drtnal4INP: PRESIDENT'S ABILITY TO ISSUIIE DUTIES
Under the terms of my Joint resolution the Acting President is permitted to exercise the powers and duties of the Office of the President until the end of the current presidential term, It the President does not recover sufficiently to assume those duties himself. If the President does recover, the Acting President may so declare and the Vice President will then cease to exercise the functions of the Presidency. In the event that neither of these two contingencies occur, my resolution would permit the Senate and the House of Representatives to determine whether the President had sufficiently recovered to again resume his duties. Since I realise that the Congress is not always in session, and its function under my resolution is of extreme Importance, I have taken the precaution to provide authority for the Congress to pass a statute declaring what officer or officers may convene either or both Houses of Congress to determine the Issue of inability. These basically are the provisions of the amendment.
CONGRESSIONAL RESOLUTION itEXIARDINO PRESIDENTIAL DISABILITY WOULD BE CONCURRENT RESOLUTION
I should touch on one other matter in discussing my proposal. When tne proposal states that the Senate and the House of Representatives may pass a resolution declaring inability, or declaring that the inability has been removed, I am referring to the type of resolution which Is popularly known as a concurrent resolution. This is a resolution which, as all Members know, does not require the signature of the President. A concurrent resolution, as such, is not mentioned in the Constitution. It has been used for so long, however, without serious question that I believe it forms a proper vehicle to be utilised in this instance.
Senator KEFAUVER. Following Senator O'Mahoney's presentation we have statements, in support, of their legislative proposals, which I will order printed in the record, by Senator Bridges, by Senator
h4	1.1ttisionN•rfAi' Ws/031MA'
Fulbright, together with Some attachnionts, and by Senator Payne, and also a statement which I made on the floor of the Senate on JIM' nary 13 In slipport of my proposal.
(The documents referred to are as follows:)
STAIEWliNT DT MOM,* 0. PATNIS Olt PRESIDENTIAL INCAPACITATION Stumm() TO TIIII CONIITITOTIONAT. AMENDIARIT8 SUBCOM MEMO; or TIIR SENATD JUDICIARY
colt minty
It 18 a real pleasure for me to submit this statement on the question of Pres!. dentist incapacitation, The chairman and every member of this subcommittee deserve a great deal of praise for going forward with consideration of this controversial, but tremendously important problem end I want to take this opportunity to particularly commend the chairman for the very great interest he personally has shown in this matter.
As you gentlemen know the reason that presidential incapacitation is a problem today is the vague wording of article II, section 1, clause 0 of the Constitution. In other words the problem bus existed since the Constitution was adopted, which immediately suggests the question, "Why hasn't it been resolved before this?" There have been several attempts throughout our history to clarify the constitutional language but as you know, no action has ever been taken.
After considerable study, the record of the treatment of this question has led me to the conclusion that proposals for resolving the doubt which now exists which originate within the Congress will not in all probability ever receive final approval. The reasoning behind my conc;asion is as follows: Presidential disability is a question that can best be described as politically loaded. The Congress of the United States is quite properly the forum of partisan politics, but unfortunately this very desirable characteristic makes any proposal dealing with the problem of disability immediately suspect. Proponents of proposals dealing with the problem are likely to be suspected of being motivated by partisan or regional considerations while opponents are likely, to be suspected of being motivated by similar factors. Obviously any solution of this problem, if It is to be adopted, will have to be very carefully conceived and thoughtfully balanced to avold conveying a seeming advantage or disadvantage to any one group. In the final analysis any such proposal must be weighed and tested by the men who properly represent partisan and sectional interest—the Members of Congress. But on the basis of past experience, I firmly believe that no proposal relating to this problem can get to first base without having broad national support.
Because of this T introduced a hill in the Senate last year to create a' high level, nonpartisan Hoover-type commission to study the problem of Presidential incapacitation and make recommendAtions to the Congress. Under that bill (S. 924), which is now pending before the Committee on Rules and Administration, the Commission would also be empowered to study the future of the electoral college and the role of the Vice President in the Federal Government. While I realise that S. 024 is not before this subcommittee, it offers an approach to this problem which I believe the subcommittee might well consider. The Commission proposed by S. 024 was patterned very closely after the 2 Hoover Commissions. The very real success enjoyed by the 2 Hoover Commissions is in large part due. I believe, to the very great prestige of the members of the 2 Commissions. In view of the fact that the disability problem is of such gravity and of such a controversial nature, It seems to me that the best hope for its ultimate resolution lies in a high level, nonpartisan commission whose recommendations will receive wide national support. It is my hope that the living former Presidents of the United States would be invited to serve on the Commission and the remaining members would be selected in the same manner as were the members of the Hoover Commission. Recommendations from a group including such eminent Americans as President Hoover and President Truman would not be under political suspicion. They would come before Congress for approval or disapproval with a prestige that would enable eon-gressional consideration on a plane above mutual suspicion or party politics.
This question of the approach to be taken in resolving the problem of Presidential incapacitation is, in essence, a preliminary matter for your subcommittee to decide. I am confident that the decision reached will he a sound one and in the best interests of the American people. The important thing here is not the method but the result, and whatever method will achieve a wise result is the right method.
PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY	35
Now let me turn to my own thoughts on Preeldentint Incapacitation and the bill which I Introduced last yetie (H. MS) which is identical with one (8. 2183) which I introduced In the Sith Congress.
There is no more Interesting constitutional question today than the problems assecialed with the present provisions of the Constitution with regard to just what happens when a President Is not removed, has not resigned, and has not died, but is tunable to perform the duties of his office. As you know from the study you have already given this subject, the problem Is far from new. In feet It huts existed slime the Constitution was adopted. While the question of just what was meant by "Inability" was raised nt the Comditutional Convention, it was given very little attention and no conclusions were reached. Until the nssassinat Ion of President JfifIlPF! Garfield the problem received practleally no attention by anyone, and none by Congress.
During time period while President Ginrflehl lay mortally wounded, considerable discussion took plate as to whether the Vire President should exercise the duties of the Presidency hut It was finally decided, apparently contrary to fact, that President Garfield was not consIltutIonally unable to discharge his duties of the Mice. Ills death put nn end to the urgency of a solution to the problem and the matter lay dormant until President Woodrow Wilson's ilinese. Although Congress then gave the question some consideration it took no final action and In retrospect ft appears that the White !louse itself had determined that President Wilson was not constitutionally disabled.
After Wilson's Illness the matter ngaln receded from public attention and .cohgressional awareness and was not revived until the fall of 1055 when President Eisenhower suffered a heart attack. Fortunately the President's illness did not prevent him from carrying on the duties of his office, but RAM serve to focus attention once again on the need for establishing some definite procedure to be followed in the event of Presidential inability. The President's subsequent illnesses have served to underline the need for a solution to this problem.
Today it is patently obvious that executive leadership of the United States ;mist be a continuing thing and that we cannot nfford to have any possibility of .11 lapse. Any such lapse could well be disastrous, not only the United States alone, but to the entire free world. Therefore, Congress has a very grave responsibility to the Nation to resolve, once and for all, the doubt that surrounds this aspect of the succession clause of the Constitution.
President Eisenhower nt a press conference In January 10116 firmly expressed his belief that steps should be taken now to clarify the 1.rocedures to be followed in the event of Presidential inability, and properly placed the responsibility to take Such action on the Congress. The President made the following statement:
"Well, when you are as closely confined to your bed as I was for some time, you think about lots of things, and this was one of the foremost in my mind.
"I do believe that there should be some' agreement on the exact meaning of the Constitution, who has the authority to act.
"The Constitution seems to be clear the Congress cannot only make the laws of succession, but it can determine what is to be done, and It says, 'In the case of So-and-So and So-and-So,' but it does not say who is to determine the disability of the President. And we could well Imagine a case where the President would be unable to determine his own disability.
"I think it is a subject that, in its broadest aspects, every phase of It should be carefully studied by the Congress, advised with the Attorney General, and any kind of advice they want from the executive department, and some kind of resolution of doubt reached. I think ft would be good for the country."
On the basis of my own study of the matter it seems to me that the arguments holding that the framers of the Constitution did not, in the event of Presidential inability, intend the Vice President to succeed to the title of President, but only to exercise the powers and duties is the most compelling, for many reasons. First, the whole history of the Constitutional Convention points in this direction. Secondly, I believe that the rule followed by the courts to the effect that where words admit different meaning, the one consonant with the object in view Is to be selected, is entirely reasonable and logical, and particularly applicable to the problem at band. If we assume that the succession clause means that a Vice President succeed to the title of President in the event of inability of the President it raises almost insurmountable problems. On the other hand, if we assume that the Vice President does not acquire the title, but only the powers and duties, the problem becomes relatively simple, and involves only spelling out adequate procedures by legislation.
What then does it really boil down to? In general terms it is a question of determining Presidential inability. This necessarily involves who should initiate
36	PIILSIONNTIAL INABILITY
proceedings, who should make the determination, bow the determination should be made, and finally how such an inability Is to be terminated. The first question, who should initiate proceedings, is probably the simplest.one to answer. Here we must recognize that inability can be of varying kinds. For instance there could be Just plain physical inability, In this event the 'President, himself, should make the determination and notify the Congress. Such a notification should servo to autotualically give the Vice President the responsibility to exercise the powers and duties of the President, but should not give him the title. On the other hand inability could be of such a nature that the President could not make the decision, such as paralysis, coma, or mental incapacitation. In this event someone else would have to Initiate proceedings and to my mind there is only one logical person to do this. lie Is the Vice President. The courts have a well-established rule that in contingent grants of power, the one to whom the power Is granted should determine when the emergency has arisen. The Vice PresIdent is charged by the Constitution to exercise the powers and duties of the President when the latter is unable to do so, and therefore It is the Vice President's responsibility to raise the question when he has good cause to believe the President is Incapacitated.
It might be said that the Vice President should determine when inability exists, but experience has shown that this procedure cannot be relied on, In effect, it would require the Vice President to act at his peril and in the two instances when the occasion hos arisen, the Vice President has refused to act. History, as well as considerations of human nature, require that the Vice President be given some degree of dear legal sanction and protection in the event of Presidential inability. In order to avoid the dangers of partisan accusations and the undesirable consequences of a possible struggle for power, it would appear that the Vice President should only raise the question and that the determination should be made by some other agency.
Now we come to the heart and the moat troublesome part of the problem. Who should make the determination and how should It be made? Many proposals have been advanced on this subject, all of which have merit, and all of which appear to raise some rather serious problems. It would seem to come down to deciding which system would be the most feasible and at the same time involve the smallest degree of hazard. At this point It should be noted that the whole reason for needing any system at all is because of the recognised necessity for having continuing executive leadership. Therefore, any system must be one that will permit reasonably expeditious determination, without sacrificing the ability to make a correct decision to considerations of speed. A system that is time consuming would be too cumbersome and and unwieldly and would not meet therequirements of the problem. It has ',een suggested that it is the responsibility of Congress to make the decision, but I believe that experience has shown that on such an important question Congress could never act with the required degree of promptitude. In all probability it would take Congress weeks or even months to reach such a decision, it indeed It could reach one at all. For largely the same reasons I believe that a select committee of Congress would prove unworkable.
With regard to Congress there is another Important consideration which should be taken into account. Congress is the forum for partisan politics, and properly so. However, the determination of Presidential inability should be free of political considerations, and should be insofar as possible a question of fact. Whether or not the President has the support of any groups or party should not play auy part in the question of the Inability of a President to perform his duties. To allow such a situation to arise would be to permit the party or parties which lost the presidential election to override the decision of the people. Therefore, I believe that Congress should at most play a very limited part in determining Presidential inability.
It has been suggested that the decision of a President's possible incapacitation should be made by the Cabinet since it is the closest group to the President and in the best position to know. It is probably true that the Cabinet, due to its close personal contact with the President, would have access to information bearing directly on the question, but I believe that there are other considerations which would make it undesirable to have the Cabinet perform this important function. Obviously there is a great possibility that political considerations might influence the Cabinet, either individually, or collectively. Personal loyalty, while it is a commendable trait, should not play part in a decision of this nature, and of all the agencies of Government the Cabinet wank' most strongly be influenced by personal loyalty. During the illness of President Oar-
PRE DleNTIAb INABILITY	37
field It was personal loyalty that restrained the Cabinet from declaring the President incapacitated. Wilson summarily dismissed a member of his Cabinet for disloyalty because he advocated such a decision. From this It would seem reasonable that any Cabinet decision, in all probability, would be influenced by factors which should not enter into a question of such importance.
Wo come then to a question of what agency of the Government Is reasonably free of the influences that should be avoided. The obvious answer le the Supreme Court. A proposal has been made that the Court should make the (incision on a petition fora writ of mandamus to order the Vico President to exercise the functions of the President. This proposal In itself involves serious constitutional questions which I will not go into since I feel there Is another reason why it should be rejected. I have already pointed out that any system which would be time consuming would be too cumbersome to meet the demands of the situation. It should go without saying that the judicial process Is necessarily slow and it seems to me that It could not be expected to move with rapidity on such a weighty question as Presidential Inability.
On the other hand, as I have indicated, the Court is the only branch of the Government that Is removed from political influence and would not be affected by questions of loyalty. This was the rector that caused me to prepare and in. troduco S. 238. I mu not irrevocably committed to the provisions of this bill, but it seems to me that It meets many of the problems involved better than most of the other proposals that have been advanced so far. Briefly, the bill would provide that the President notify the Congress in writing of his inability, If able to do so, and such notification would automatically give the Vice President the responsibility of exercising the powers and duties of the President, but would not give him the title. When the President felt be was recovered he would resume his duties by notifying Congress. With regard to disability of a nature that prevented the President from notifying Congress, the bill provides that if the Vico President had good cause to believe that such an Inability existed he would notify the Chief Justice. The Chief Justice would then appoint a panel of qualified, eivillau, medical specialists who would examine the President. Each member would individually submit a report of his findings, stating the physical condition of the President, and his conclusion of whether the President was able to exercise the powers and duties of his office. If all the members of the panel agreed in the conclusion that the President was suffering an Inability, the Chief Justice would notify the Congress in writing. Such notification would have the effect of placing the powers and duC"s, but not the title, of President on the Vice President.
The bill has bee-. objected to principally on the basis that it enlarges the judicial functions of the Court. To my mind this objection is not well founded since the duty placed on the Chief Justice is strictly ministerial in character and is not essentially different from other duties imposed on the Chief Justice by statute. The question has also been raised as to how would the inability determined by the medical panel be terminated. It is my feeling that this should be accomplished simply by the President notifying the Congress in writing that he was resuming the responsibilities of his office. At first glance it might seem that this could well result in a struggle for power, but I believe that when csre-fully considered such would not be the case. A President would necessarily be hesitant to resume his office after being found incapacitated until he was sure of his condition, because he would not Want to run the risk of the process being repeated. Second, the President is the President unless he vacates the office by death or resignation, or is removed by the Congress. The decision as to ability or Inability is his and his alone. except in those situations which prevent hint from making the decision.
Since introducing S. 238 1 have continued to study this problem and would like to suggest a modification which I think would improve the procedures proposed in my bill as presently written. This modification would in several ways be very similar to the proposal of the distinguished chairman of this subcommittee in Senate Joint Resolution 134. Although I have not worked it out In complete detail the idea basically would be to set up a permanent commission which would decide the question of Presidential disability whenever requested by the Vice President. In short the Commission would be the deciding agency in lien of the Chief Justice and panel of doctors as presently provided In S. 238. Though I would not recommend that doctors actually be members of the Commission it would seem to me that the Commission should seek such medical advice.
Theinembership of the Commission is something that In itself is highly con-ttovereiaL However, in view of the nature of the problem it would seem to me that the Chief Justice should be the Chairman, but should not have a vote. The
38	PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY
other members should probably be the majority rind minority leaders of each House of Congress, the Secretary of State, the Secretary of the Treasury, the Secretary of Defense, and the Attorney General. In this manner the problem of having either the Congress or the Cabinet decide the question would he avoided, while at the same time the advantages of each of these bodies in relation to this problem could be realized.
In this statement I have not attempted to cover all of the many ramifications of the question of Presidential inability, but only to point up what appears to me to be the principal controlling considerations, and to test some of the proposals that have been made against those considerations. I am sure that ns the subcommittee continues its study of this mater it will continue to develop valuable information on all aspects of the problem. The arguments, pro and eon, for any specific proposal or on any given interpretation will be multitudinous and weighty and the ultimate decision with which this subcommittee will be faced will be a very difficult one. I want to take this opportunity to assure the subcommittee of my lasting interest in this matter and to express my willingness to be of assistance in any way that I can.
STATEMENT OF lios. J. W. rt7rintintir
Mr. Chairman. I appreciate being given this opportunity to present my views on Senate Joint Resolution 100, a proposed amendment to the Constitution relating to the inability of the President to discharge the powers and duties of its office. I Introduced this resolution in the Senate of the United States on June 10, 19,17, and I introduce for the record n copy of Senate Joint Resolution 100, and ask that it be printed at this point in my remarks.
The applicable part of the Constitution which Senate Joint' Resolution 100 is designed to clarify is contained in article Ii, section 1, clause 0, which provides "In ease of the removal of the President from office, or of his death, resignation, or inability to discharge the powers and duties of the said office, the same shall devolve on the Vice President, and the Congress may by law provide for the case of removal, death, resignation, or Inability, both of the President and Vice President, declaring what officer shall then act ns President, and such officer shall then act as President, and such officer shall act accordingly, until the disability be removed, or a President shall be elected."
This provision of the Constitution thus takes into account four possibilities regarding succession during the Presidential term: Removal (impeachment), death, resignation, and inability.
A study of the history of successions which have occurred under authority of article II, section 1, clause 6, reveals that succession by reason of death of the President has occurred upon seven occasions; that removal (Impeachment) was attempted once, but the attempted impeachment of President Johnson failed by a single vote: that no President has ever resigned; that no President has ever been determined to be unable, by reason of a disability, to discharge the powers and duties of the office, although prior to the present administration there have been at least two Presidents whose abilities to discharge the powers and duties of the office have been seriously questioned by students of constitutional government (Garfield and Wilson).
I propose to confine this statement to the problems presented by the inability clause. The prime problems raised but unanswered by this provision of the clause are as follows:
What kind of disability is included?
In what manner and by whom is the disability to be determined?
What period of time is involved?
How may the status quo be restored if disability is eliminated?
Many take the position that any problems arising by reason of the inability clause can be resolved by appropriate legislation, and that a constitutional amendment is unnecessary. Authority, if any exists for such legislation, must
he found in article II, section 1, the pertinent part of which is	• * and the .
Congress may by law provide for the ease of • * • inability both of the President and Vice President, declaring what officer shall then act as President and such officer shall act accordingly until the disability be removed or a President shall be elected."
Analysis of this clause indicates that it is not applicable to the problem of establishing procedures for determining inability but rather It is applicable only and is directed to the problem of determining the line 01 succession when those
PRMIDENTIAL INABILITY	39
elected to the office of President and Vice President are no longer capable of discharging the powers and duties of the Presidency. The clause does not give
authority to the Cong-ess to make laws establishing or determining that inability does in fact exist. Many constitutional experts are of the opinion that only by means of a constitutional amendment can procedures be established whereby a President can be declared incapable of performing the duties of his office because of physical or mental disability. The important point to be made, however, is that to allow any doubt as to the constitutionality of legislation in this area is much too hazardous to leave to chance. The only absolutely safe procedure is to enact a constitutional amendment, thereby eliminating the possibility of unconstitutional legislation.
For over 75 years, the problems relating to the disability of a President have received some attention by the Congress, but nothing has ever been done with regard to them. It has been said that we have existed as a Nation for nearly 175 years without providing a solution to the problems inherent in the "inability" clause and in all that time no serious detriment to the Nation has occurred. But the mere fact that we as a Nation have been fortunate thus far is no reason to tempt providence in so important a matter ns the Presidency. Prudence and commonsense dictate that serious detriment may occur it we neglect to remedy the situation.
The amendment proposed by Senate Joint Resolution 100 is nonpolitical in nature. It Is not a Democratic or a Republican amendment. It Is not a liberal or a conservative amendment. It is a necessary amendment in view of the serious problems raised by the failure of the Constitution to provide for a continuity in the adequate performance of the powers and duties of the President in the event of disability. This proposed amendment properly meets the demands of the situation. It removes auy uncertainty about the legality of any action taken during the incapacity of the President.
The proposed amendment provides that whenever the Congress believes the President is unable, by reason of physical or mental disability, to discharge the powers and duties of the office, it shall request the Supreme Court to decide whether such disability exists and if the Court so decides, then the powers and duties of the President shall devolve upon the Vice President or upon the person next in line of succession.
The proposal provides for succession only after due consideration by the two Houses of Congress and by the Supreme Court. The action thus taken has an impact on all three branches of the Government; yet no unilateral action by any single branch of the Government can be conclusive. I am convinced that it is absolutely vital that the system of checks and balances, America's unique contribution to government, be maintained, and Senate Joint Resolution 100 does not violate this time-honored system.
The requirement that the Congress should be directly involved in proceedings involving succession to the Presidency is absolutely necessary. The President Is elected by all the people—so is the Congress. What other body under our Constitution is the alter ego of all our citizenry? It is, therefore, fitting and proper that no possibility of succession because of inability take place until the Congress has expressed its belief that the President is disabled.
The proposed amendment requires a majority of a quorum of two-thirds of
the total number of the Members of each House for adoption of a resolution. Hence, it precludes the possibility of a small clique in either House achieving a political coup. At the same time It does not require so great a preponderance as
to allow a small clique to prevent, for political advantage, a necessary change in the Executive.
There has been some comment that the Supreme Court should be kept out of this problem, since it is contrary to the traditional constitutional purposes for
which the Court was established. There is little substance to such an argument.
The Constitution already provides that the Chief Justice of the Unite States shall preside over proceedings for the removal of a President for cause, through
impeachment. The problem herein is not a political problem. It is a national
governmental problem. The matter can only be resolved by facing up to the responsibilities required under constitutional government. Accordingly, the
participation by the Supreme Court in matters involving succession to the Presi-
dency is not only already required by our own Constitution, but nothing required of the Supreme Court Under the proposed amendment can in any way be deemed
to impair the dignity of the Court, demean it, or cause it to become involved in partisan politics. The proposed amendment provides that upon a referral by the Congress, the final responsibility for determining whether disability exists
40	paKsiDENTIAL INABILITY
rests upon those of judicial temperament, appointed for life and, insofar as constitutional government can provide, beyond the temptations of political advantage. Yet, the Court cannot act unless first requested to do so by the separate and independent legislative branch of the Government.
Senate Joliet Resolution 100 allows for due consideration by both elected and appointed officials. It requires action by officials already provided for In the Constitution, and It does not necessitate the creation of a new body of officiate, commission, or agency.
It provides that the succession shall continue to the end of the current term, unless the disability is sooner relieved, in which event the President will again assume his office, This is consistent with the intention of the Founding Fathers who intended that succession by reason of disability should continue 4'o • • until the disability be removed, or a President shall be elected." Further, logic decrees that this should be so, for the people having elected a President intended that be should serve in that office for all of the ensuing term except for such periods as ue may be disabled, or unless the office becomes vacant for the other reasons set forth in article II, section 1, clause
The proposal provides for resumption by the President of his office in the same manner as is provided for relieving him of his burden when he is disabled ; that is, by concerted action of the Congress and by the Supreme Court.
It provides for the possibility of succession by reason of inability even during periods when there is no Vice President by assumption of the office by those next in line of succession as provided by law.
And finally, it provides for succession even during possible periods when the Congress is not in session by establishing a procedure for reconvening the Congress upon the joint call of the presiding officers of both Chambers for the specific purpose only of considering whether it is the belief of the Congress that the President is unable, by reason of physical or mental disability, to discharge the powers and duties of his office.
take this oppOrtunity to point out to the committee that certain weaknesses are inherent in various proposals which have been suggested from time to time. For example, some say the President himself has the authority to declare himself disabled. 'While the Constitution Is Client on whether the President is the appropriate one to nuke a determination of inability, such solution, even if constitutionally proper, is inadequate In the circumstances. What, for example, if the President is in a coma and unable to make any declaration, or Is suffering from a mental disability, or supposing the President is in fact disabled and refuses to so declare? There are those who say that in such a situation resort can be had to impeachment proceedings. This is either ridiculous or unconstitutional since disability is not a high crime or misdemeanor.
Some say that the Constitution already provides that the Vice Pre !Went has the authority to determine that a vacancy by reason of inability easts. No such grant of authority to the Vice President can be found anywhere in the Constitution. Further, no such grant of power ought to be placed in the hands of any one man, let atone the hands of the man who has the most to gain by the exercise of such a grant of power. Indeed, the impeachment proceedings are already so designed as to prevent the Vice President from being in a position to determine his own succession by providing that the Chief Justice of the United States and not the ViceePresident Oen preside over such proceedings.
Proposals embodying the view that the Cabinet is the appropriate body to dce termine disability suffer from the obvious disadvantage that cabinet officers have a direct interest in the continuance in office of the President who appointed them. Cabinet officers are-the primal choice of a President, and serve at his pleasure. Their vested interest may color their judgment. Further, being nonelected officials they are not reflective of the will of the electorate.
Proposals for a joint determination by the Cabinet and certain legislative officials suffer from the obvious disadvantage that they give the Cabinet a veto power in any determination of inability.
Some would propose a speclatcommittee be appointed for determining Presidential' disability. Such a committee necessitates the creation of an additional body outside the contemplation of the Constitution and would create a duplication of officials presently available to make a determination. Further, such committee would either. not have final authority and hence would serve only. to complicate the procedure and create additional delays In reaching a final determination; or such committee would.bave final authority, and the placing of such power In the bands of .e few might well lead to undesirable consequences.
PIIIISIDITN.,.*TIAL INABILITY	41
Senate Joint Resolution 100 has the advantage of simplicity, yet it allows for deliberate reflection upon a grave constitutional change. It can be effected in as relatively short a time as circumstances may require; at the same time it provides a broad base of participation by responsible officials so that nono can manipulate it for personal or partisan political advantage.
I believe it appropriate to bring to the attention of the committee an article appearing in the New York Times on January 23, 1958 relating to a letter from Chief Justice of the United States Warren addressed to Representative Kenneth B. Keating of the House Judiciary Committee. The Chief Justice stated that it was the unanimous belief of the Supreme Court that no member of the Court should be a member of any commission created to determine whether a President was disabled. The basis for this belief being that there is a "possibility of a controversy of this character coming to the Court, and the danger of disqualification which might result in lack of a quorum, it would be inadvisable for any member of the Court to serve on such a commission."
In light of the foregoing, the advisability of adopting the amendment proposed by Senate Joint Resolution 100 becomes readily apparent, Under it, the Supreme Court would be acting as a judicial body without having been invoiced in any prior proceeding. The constitutionality of the procedure and their determination thereunder could not be challenged. Further, the Court itself recognises the probability, under any procedure, of the matter coining before the Court for a final determination. Since this Is so, the most appropriate and direct procedure Is outlined in Senate Joint Resolution 100. Further, the Court voices no objection to making a final determination, it merely objects to having one Or more members involved in any prior proceeding, the propriety of which would ultimately be placed before the Court.
(The text of the New York Times article follows:)
Me New York Times, Thniklay, January 23, 10551
"Molt COURT JUSTICES AGAINST DISABILITY ROLE
"WASHINGTON, January 22 (AP).--Chief Justice Earl Warren said today that
he and the other Supreme Court Justices felt they should not be members of any
commission to determine whether a President was disabled.
"Various proposals before Congress to provide by law for the Vice President to take over the Presidency temporarily in case of need call for a commission to determine whether a President la in fact disabled. Several of these bills would provide for one or more members of the Supreme Court to be on the commission. "Chief Justice Warren expressed his views In a letter to Representative Kenneth 11. Keating of upstate New York, senior Republican member of the House Judiciary Committee. Ile wrote:
"'It has been the belief of all of us (the Justices) that because of the separation of powers in our Government, the nature of the judicial procesa, the possibility of a controversy of this character coming to the Court, and the danger of disqualification which might result in lack of a quorum, it would be Inadvisable
for any member of the Court to serve on such a commission.'"	•
I again, Mr. Chairman, In closing, recommend for the thoughtfaconsideration
of this committee the merits of Senate Joint Resolution 100.
introdute at this peint, for the benefit of the committee, a bibliography of
selected material on Presidential inability.
SELECTED If ATERTAL ON PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY -	•
•
Administration asks constitutional rules for replacing it disabled President. Alas: W., Aprli 6,1957. p. 151.
Butler, Benjamin: Presidential inability. 1881. 133 N. Asa. R., p. 428. Cooley, Thomas M.: Presidential inability. 1881. 138 N. Am. R., p. 422. Corvrin,-ltdward S.: The President: Office anti Powers, New York, New York
University Press, 1941.
CuirttS,,Geotge T.: Presidential inability. 1881. 25 Harpers Weekly, p. 583. Disability of the President. 1910. 23 Law Notes, p, 141.
Dwight, Theodore W.: Presidential inability. 1881. 133 N. Am. R., p. 488., . For emergency use only: substitute President. April 19, 1057. TO Scholastic; pp.
14-18, '
Frelinghuysen. Peter, Jr.: Presidential disability. September 1958. 807 Annals of the Am. Acad. of Pol. and Soc. SC., pp. 144-155.
42	prty.811)ENTI At. INABILITY
rulten, J. Alexander: Presidential inability. I1*11. 21 Albany	pp. 280 280.
Gilliam, Armistead 11'. and Stoat Jonathan V. Presidenthil inabilli). 19541. 21 Geo. Wash. Univ. L. 11., pp. 418 lilt.
Greet], Theodore F.: Preside:dint sueeesslon. !pm. IIII Dick. L. it., pp. :123 331. Johnson, U, W.: Presidential dtsnbility. Apr. 211, 1057. New Itepnbile.
Koonce, RA	Who Phan deterinino if a Presideet Is disabled. 11111. 10701.
/ornocralle Ill g., NT. r,:i.
Lavery, Prhan A.: Presidential	11122 S Am. it. A. .1., pp. 13 K.
I d'il% it 1, John It.: A solution of the presidential Inability !golden]. 1922. S Am.
11..1.3.. pp. 180 190.
New York State Itnr Ass'n.: Committee on Federal Censtitution. Presideetilli
inability report. Bull. April IPM, pp. tiet
Parsons, W.: Who sueeeeds n dlsabltvl PreSidelif . Apr. it, irl? Affierlen.
Presidential Inability. 1020 2 1Veekly It., P.451.
Presidential disability. Apr. 10, IPM. lnminuuttcallIi, p. 5:3.
The. President's Illness. 1920 11 Am. Pol. Sc. It., pp, N7
Rogers. Lindsay.: Presidential !nubility. 2 Review, p.481.
Ruth C.: Presidential succession n11,1 disability. 1950. 2l haw & Con-
temp. Prob., p. UM.
Silva, Ruth C.: Presidentinl succession. Ann Arbor, linty of Mkt. Press, 1951.
Smith. 11.: If a President collapses. Mar. 23, 1957. 2211 Sat. Eve. Post.,
pp. 20-21
Truman, Harry 8: Presidential disability. June 30, 1957. N. Y. Times, p. 1.
Trumbull, Lyman: 1'reside:1nel Inability. 1881. 13.1 N. Am. It., p. 417.
U, S. Congress. House. Committe on the Judiciary. tk3.2 ilenrings on Pres!.
dential inability. Washington, U. S. Govt. Print. Off., 105(3.
U. S. Congress. House. Committee on the Judiciary. 81.2 Presidential Inability.
Washington, U. S. Govt. Print. Off., 1950. 74 p.
U. 8. Congress. House. Committee on the Judiciary. R1.2 Hearings on Presi-
dential Inability. Washington, U. S. Govt. Print. Off., 1950.
U. S. Congress. House. Committee on the Judiciary. 84.2 PresIdentini in-
ability. Replies to a questionnaire. Washington, U. S. Govt. Printing Off.,
1050.
U. S. Congress.. House. Committee on the Judiciary. 85.1 Presidential In-
ability; analysis of replies to questionnaire and testimony at hearing. Wash-
ington, U. S. Govt. Print. Off., 1057. 808 pps.
Waugh, Edgar W.: Second Consul. New York, Hobbs-Merril, low.
When Presidents become ill there's no clear line of authority. Oct. 1055. U. S.
News, pp. 00-03.
Who gets the power when a President Is disabled. Jnn. 1050. U. S. News,
pp. 42-51.
Williams, Irving G.: The rise of the vice presidency. Washington, Public Af-
fairs Press, 1050.
Wilmerding, Lucius, Jr.: Presidential inability. 1057. 72 Pol. Sc. Q. pp. 101-181.
Wyman, Louis C.: When a President is too ill to handle the job. Mar. 1 1950.
U. S. News, pp. 44-45.
UNITED STATES SENATE,
COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS,
January ti, 1958.
Hon. Herta Hsrauv-ta,
Chairman, &ikon' mUtee on Constitutional Amendments,
Senate Judiciary Committee, iVashington, D. C.
DEAR Ma. CHAIRMAN: I do not anticipate that I will be able to personally attend the bearing being conducted by your subcommittee this afternoon on legislation covering the subject of Presidential inability or disability.
Yesterday, I introduced one bill, S. 3113, and two proposed constitutional amendments, Senate Joint Resolutions 143 and 144 on this subject and have furnished Mr. Wayne H. Smithey of your subcommittee professional staff with a detailed explanation of them. I will be very appreciative it you can arrange to have this material made a part of the hearings.
Sincerely yours,
STYLES BRIDGES.
Pit PISID}N; 1IAI. INABILITY	43
NINA NATION of	kliUliV6 PI1OP+elnu 801.11.1110Nfl TO THIS PKtitilLESI or
11/0.81111ENIIAL I NA1111.111"
I 1.1 T HOD UCT
lu the 1,111 1 !lave Introduced the question of Presidential InabIlitp would be determined by the Congress. Its Initial consideration would be by a con• elnronlItoe, cianposed of the President pro tempore of tht! *male, the t'IpK•nker of 111(1 ifial%e, and the majority end minority leaders of both Houses. roll( iWill g allirmallre action by this committee, a concurrent resolulkli would Is' reported to melt I billYe, the (adoption of WIJIP11 would re+inire the concurrence two-thirds of those present owl rolling.
!loth of my proposals of constitutional amendment are based on the assumption that the Comtlint Ion might not now contain totithorily for Congress to provide by leghltillon for the determination of the nbillty of flue President to discharge the powers and duties of him office.
In one Joint resolution I am proposing by C01141111ilkiial amendment to achieve what the hill Is designed to do by stntule.
The other Joint resolution proposes, as an niter:Intl ve, a C071511111t 101181 IImentl• molt which, mom/ other things, grants Congress constitutional authority to provide for the making of such determinations, but would not Incorporate Into the Constitution Itself details of the methods to be Used.
11111.1,
The 1,111 is based upon the assumption that constitutional authority now exists under which the Congress by legislation may provide for the determination of the ability of the President to discharge the powers and duties of his office.
Subsection (a) of the first section of the bill creates a committee for the consideration of any question which may arise as to the inability of the President to discharge those powers and (bales. It Is composed of the President pro tempore of the Senate, the Speaker of the House, and the majority and minority leaders of both Houses. 'fhe committee would be convened whenever the Vice President, by letter transmitted to the I'resldent pro tempore of the Senate and to the Speaker of the House, might suggest doubt as to the ability of the President to discharge his powers and duties. It could also be convened, In the absence of any such letter, upon request made by any four members of the committee, that number being prescribed as a quorum of the committee.
Subsection (b) of the first section makes It the duty of the committee, when convened for that purpose, to determine whether there is probable cause for belief that the President is unable for any cause to discharge the powers and duties of his office. If a determination Is made, by the affirmative vote of at least four members, that such Inability exists it Is then the duty of the majority leader of each House to introduce In his House a concurrent resolution stating In substance that it has been determined by the Congress that the President Is unable to discharge his powers and duties.
Subsection (c) of the first section provides that if such a resolution is adopted by both Houses, by the affirmative vote of not less than two-thirds of the Members present and voting In each House, the powers and duties of the President shall then devolve upon the Vice President, who shall discharge them until the disability of the l'resident is removed or until a new President is elected and takes office.
Subsections (d) and (e) of the first section of the bill deal with the restore-non to the President of his powers and duties upon the termination of his Inability to discharge them.
Subsection (4) requires the committee described above to be convened upon receipt, by the President pro tempore of the Senate and the Speaker of the House, of a letter from the President advising that In his opinion his inability has ceased to exist. Upon the basis of such a letter, the majority leader of each House would be required to introduce in We House a concurrent resolution stating in substance that the Congress has determined that the inability of the President no longer exists,
Subsection (e) provides that upon the adoption of such a concurrent resolution by both Houses, by majority vote of all Members present and voting in each House, the President shall resume the discharge of the powers and duties of his offi&., and that the -'Ice President shall then resume the discharge of the powers and duties of the office of Vice President.
44	PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY
Section 2 of the bill is intended to !moire the prompt disposition by the Congress of any eoncurrent resolution inIrodncrcI In
conformity will, the provisions of the first section. Section 2 would amend the rides of the Semite mut Of the House to provide for the placement of any such resoluilon upon the appropriate calendar without reference to committee. The Semite rules also would he amended to provide that no moll concurrent resolution would he subject to amendment ; that no Senator wenid be entitled to speak for more than I hour In debate thereon; that no (IMAM'S Hellion would be in order: and that points of order and appeals from the decision of the Presiding Officer mnde in the consideration of such a concurrent resolut kin would Is. decided without debate.
Following the precedent of section Int of the Legislative Reilrgaulzation Act of 1910, the rule changes so made are explicitly slated to be made by the Congress In the exercise of Its ciinstilutional right to adopt rules for its proceedings. and the right of each House to tiller sue!) rules Is expressly reserved.
JOINT HES0IXTIoN
The companion Senate Plitt reS011111(41 Is based upon the essumption that the Constitution ioes not now provide authority under which the Congress by legislation luny iirovide for the determitiallon of the Minify of the President to discharge the powers and duties of his ounce. It Wsndd propose nil amend-innit to the Constitution which would nib) thereto a new nrlicie providing the mechanism for such determinations.
Sections I RIO 2 of the proposed eonstitulloiml nineeilment would provide that such ileterminntions be made In precisely the Faille manner for which provision Is mite by the first section of the bill deseribeil above.
Section 3 of the proposed eonstitutionni amendment would provide, In n manner comparable to that prescribed by section 2 of the hill described fame. for the expeditious consideration by the Congress of nity concurrent resolution reciting n determination by the Congress that the President is linable to discharge the powers And ditties of his office, or that any previously determined disability of the President has Ceased to exist.
Section 4 of the proposed constitutional amendment would Authorize the President pro temp ore of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives, acting jointly, to call the Oongress into special session for the consideration of any concurrent resolution for a determination that the President is unable to discharge his powers and duties if the committee estnblished by section 1 of the amendment should determine, at any time at which the Congress is not in session, that there Is probable cause for belief that the President is unable to discharge those powers and duties.
Section IS of the proposed constitutional amendment provides that It shall be Inoperative unless ratified by legislatures of three fourths of the several States within 7 years from the date of Its submission.
ALTFRNATITE: JOIN? sysommoN
The alternative joint resolution also rests upon the assumption 'that the, Constitution does not provide authority under which the Congress may provide for the determination of the ability of the President to discharge  his powers and duties. It differs from the joint resolution described above In that it proposes a constitutional amendment which would grant to the Congress constitutional authority to provide for the making of such determinations, hut would not incorporate into the Constitution Itself n detailed prescription of the method to be used in making such determinations. The amendment proposed by the alternative joint resolution is based upon the theory that (11 the Constitution should provide a means for the solution of any problem of Presidential Inability which may arise in the future, but (2) the fallibility of human foresight may render impracticable any undertaking to place In the Constitution Itself detailed provisions regulating the disposition of every contingency which might conceivably occur at any time during the future life of the Nation.
Sections 1 and 2 of the alternative amendment proposed by this joint resolution wontd replace the present provisions of the sixth paragraph of section 1 of article II of the Constitution, which would then be repealed by section 5 of the amendment.
Section 1 of the alternative amendment deals with the situation in which the President is rendered incapable of performing his duties because of his removal, death, resignation, or Inability occurring at a time at which there is a
PltieSIDKNTIAL INABILITY	45
Vice President who can discharge those duties. It would restate the first clause of the sixth paragraph of section 1 of article H of the Constitution In a minter which would espresely confirm the historical interpretation given thereto by providing that in the case of the renno‘al, death, or resignation of tbo President, the Vice President shall become President, and shall serve as such for the remainder of the term for ti/bleb his predecessor was elected. It would acid a new provision to the effect (l-at in the event of the inability of the Presi• dent to discharge fits powerm and duties, such powers and duties would be dIseharged by the Vice President tally during the continuance of the inability of the President. Thum, it would be made clear that in the event of Incapaeity of the President milling from tenses otLer than removal, death, or resignation,
the Vice President would not succeed to the of	of President or become•
President.
Section 2 of the niternntive amendment deals with the situation in which the President is rendered incapable of performing his duties because of his removal, death. resignation, or inability occurring at a time at which there is no Vice President who can discharge those duties. It restates, without change in effect, the present provisions of the second clause of the sixth paragraph of section 1 of article II of the Constitution. Like the present constitutional provision which it would replace, it would confer authority under which the Congrese may provide by law for such a situation.
The first senntence of section 3 of the alternative amendment provides new express authority under which the Congress Omit provide by law for the deter-minatio-c of all questions of fact arising under sections 1 and 2. The second sentence provides new authority under which the Congress Is authorized by enneurrent resolutiou, adopted with the concurrence of two-thirds of all Members present and voting in each House, to provide for the discharge of the powerm and duties of the President at any time of emergency at which there may be no person who is qualified, under the Constitution or under any statute pre-
ly enacted, to discharge those powers and duties. That sentence is intended to enable the Congress to supply an officer to discharge the powers and duties of the office of President if (1) no person can qualify therefor under any existing constitutional or statutory authority, and (2) the Congress in precluded from making provision by statute for the designation of any such person because of the absence of any person who is qualified to sign any bill which it might enact for that purpose.
Section 4 of the alternate amendment contains a provision (comparable to that of section 4 of the principal proposed emendment described above) authorizing the President pro tempore of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of ItcpresentativeA acting jointly, to convene the Congress in special session if ttoy should determine, at any time at which the Congress is not in session. that there is probable cause for the invocation of tine provisions of the second sentence of section 8. Thins, provision is made for the solution of any unusual situation which has not been foreseen, and for which no provision has been made by statute.
Section (1 of the alternative amendment provides that the proposed amendment shall be Inoperative unless ratified by legislatures of three-fourths of the several States within 7 years from the dAte of its submission.
PRESIDENTIAL. DISABILITY
Mr. KerAuvee. Mr. President, it is generally conceded that the Office of President of the United States is one of the most—if not the most—important offices In the free world. In addition to the awesome responsibilities originally conferred by the Constitution upon the President, practice and precedent have increased both the powers and the responsibilities of this office so that the occupant of that office now possesses tremendous influence not only in domestic hut also in international affairs. Anything which affecte an institution as important as this is, therefore, a matter of grave concern to the people of the United States and certainly to their elected representatives.
The recent illness of the President, telescoped as it was upon two prior illnesses, has served to tem+ attention again upon the exercise of the powers and duties of this extremely important offiee during periods when the President may bo incapacitated. While there might have been some question of propriety in mentioning this subject at one time, the President's commendable Initiative in
2232l—dB-4
46	PRMIDEN'TIA1, 1NABILrry
submitting a constitutional amendment on the matter has served to dispel that concern. The President, in conference with congressional leaders and publicly,
has strongly urged that Congress act to clear up this area of doubt in our
Constitution. The concern today is not, and should not be, obscured by the personalities of those who temporarily occupy the offices of President and Vice
President. The question which must constantly be uppermost in nil minds In the consideration of this subject is the question of the successful operation of democratic institutions and their survival at all times, but particularly In time of peril.
The Constitution, of course, provides that In the event of the inability of the President to discharge the powers and duties of his office "the same shall devolve
on the Vice President, and the Congress may by law provide for the case of removal, death, resignation, or inability, both of the President and Vice Pres!. dent, declaring what °Meer shall then net ns President, and such officer shall act accordingly, until the disability ho reinOreti, or a President shall be elected."
It Is difficult to know what the authors of the Constitution intended by the term Inability" since inability or disability was never defined and was mentioned
only once lit the debates of the Constittitionnl Convention. According to Medi-son's notes, Mr. Dickinson expressed the thought that the section under discussion was too vague and wanted to know the extent of the term "disability" anti who was to be the judge of it. So far ns is known, no ono answered the questions and there was no further discussion bearing upon this point.
The questions asked by Mr. Dickinson at the Constitutional Convention might not now be so important had It not been for the precedent established by Vice
President John Tyler who when ho assumed the office of President in 1841 after the death of President Harrison, took the oath of President and contended that he was In fact the President anti contended that he was in tact the President and not Acting President of the United States. This contention rests upon an Interpretation that the words "the same" have reference to the office of the Presidency, as distinguished from the powers and duties of the office. The precedent established by Vice President Tyler has since been confirmed six times, by Fill-more, Johnson, Arthur, Theodore Roosevelt, Coolidge, and Truman, anti is, therefore. well established by custom. The practice, however, of a Vice President assuming the office of President, rather than assuming the powers and duties of the office, has served to inject doubt concerning the power of a temporarily disabled President to resume the powers and duties of his office upon recovery from his disability after having relinquished such powers and duties to the Vice President. As a matter of fact, the doubt so created has been afforded such weight that in two instances in the history of the United States, Vice Presidents have refused to assume the powers and duties of the office of President of the United States, although the situation, In retrospect, would certainly seem to have warranted such action.
In 1881, for example, during the 80 days of President Garfleld's fatal illness, he performed but one single act---the signing of an extradition paper. The Cabinet at one time met and discussed the inability question. All agreed upon the desirability of Vice President Arthur's acting as President during President Garfield's illness; but 4 of the 7 Cabinet members, including the Attorney General, thought that the powers and duties of the Office could not temporarily de-wire upon the Vice President. As a result, the Cabinet decided that they would not advise the President to encourage the Vice President to act as President, since it might be construed that they were asking the President to vacate his Office for the remainder of his term.
The second instance in which the Nation stood in peril for lack of resoiution of this question occurred during the administration of President Woodrow Wilson. President Wilson's illness was of a more prolonged duration than that of President Garfield, lasting from September 25, 1919, until almost the end of his term In March of 1921. During this period, because of his inability, 28 acts of Congress became taw without the President's signature. The President did not meet with his Cabinet for 8 months. The British Ambassador spent 4 months In Washington without being received by the President. Leaders In the Senate sought to discuss the terms of the Versailles Treaty with the President, but were refused permission to see him by the President's physician. The affairs of Government were largely disposed of by decisions of the President's wife, his aides in the White House, and certain members of his Cabinet. The Cabinet considered asking the Vice President to act as President, but the White House contingent fought the move. A prominent Cabinet member, Secretary of State Lansing, who approached the President's secretary with a suggestion of this
PRI.SIDSINTJAL INABILITY	47
nature, was rebuked and Inter forced to submit his resignation upon the recovery of the ]'resident.
Even from the vnntnge point of historleal perspective, no one can accurately assess today just what tinninge was done to the United States and the world by tills impasse. The league of Nations was then up in the air. Many today believe that greater Milted Stales ptirtleipation eeuld 1111%e so changed the leternational climate flint World War I I might have been averlisl. The league was l'resIdeet Wilson's brolehild. Ibid he been mumeetled by Vice President Marshall, who then would have borne the responsibility for decision and leadership, would the outcome have been different?
No one really knows---to one can really say. All we do know is that such n period of !unction in today's world might he (Well more costly, end thus it Is well that we pay heed to the maxim that the wise prepare, while others postpone. The lessons of the past, combined with the concern of the present, have impelled me to explore the atie,iimey of the Coestitution and the laws of the United States TeSIKVting this (111eStiett nt-d, ill Illy judgment, they are In need of repair.
When these matters were previously considered by the Congress, solution was rendered Impossible by the failure of those who desired a solution to agree upon the mechanism of flint solution. Home have contended that the problem ought to bo dealt with by act of Congress. Others have felt that a constitutional amendment was necessary. All seem to have recognized that a critical question to be re.solvts1 is, By whom shall the inability be detertuined? At present. the Constitution seems to place the determination of Inability in the hands of the Vice Preshlent, who must, of necessity, act at his peril. Ile must depend, of course, upon popular acceptance of his decision and he must face the possibility that the legality of his assumption of the powers and duties of the office may be challenged In the courts of the United States. As former Senator Lyman Trumbull, of Illinois, pointed out in a symposium printed in the North American Review In November ISSI, just a few months after President Garfield was fatally wounded—
"Any Vice President who should assume those duties in a doubtful case, when the exigency did not unmistakably require it, would be treated as a ursuper by all patrlotic citizens."
The Vice President must also reckon with the fact that In any court test the Constitution may be interpreted in such a way as to prevent the resumption of the powers and duties of the Presidency by the President himself upon recovery. This has, In the two instances cited, proved to be such an obstacle that the Vice Presidents of the United States have refused to accept the powers and duties of the office, although had they done so, history could not have been critical of them.
The role of the Vice President as the sole constitutional agent for the determination of the question of Presidential inability has been criticized, since the Vice President Is, in a very real sense, a party in interest. This has led to suggestions that his discretion should be conditioned upon, or replaced by, a determination by, first, the Supreme Court; second, the Congress; third, the Cabinet; or fourth, a Presidential commission.
In 1920, Representative Fess, of Ohio, proposed a constitutional amendment which would have utilised the services Of the Supreme Court, the Congress, the Cabinet, and the Vice President. He proposed that disability be determined by the Supreme Court when authorized by concurrent resolution of Congress. If Congress was not in session, the Vice President was authorised to call Congress into special session for the purpose of considering such a resolution upon rec- ommendation of the Cabinet.
Currently, there are proposals before the House of Representatives which
would make the Supreme Court, the Cabinet, or a Presidential Commission the
agency for determining or recommending Presidential inability. The proposal which the administration has indicated it favors, casts the Cabinet in the decisive role. At the outset of this session, there were only two proposals on this subject pending in the Senate. One is proposed as a constitutional amendment and the other as a straight bill.
Senator Fulbright has submitted a proposed constitutional amendment which would provide that the Supreme Court, by majority vote, could determine the question of Presidential capacity to serve, after the passage of a concurrent resolution by the Congress stating that the Congress believed the President unable to perform the powers sod duties of his office. Under the proposal of the junior Senator from Arkansas, the same procedure would have to be followed in order for the President to resume his constitutional functions.
48	PIOISIDENTIAL INABILITY
Senator Payne has introduced proposed legislation which would permit the Chief Justice, after receiving notification from the Vice President that the Vice President believed the President incapacitated, to impanel a board of from 3 to
medical specialists from civilian life. Each specinlist would examine the President and, If all concurred that the President was physically unable to perform his duties, the Chief Justice would so notify the Cougreas in writing and the Vice President would assume the powers and duties of the Presidency. Ills (intendment reflects the view of those who believe that Congress now has the constitutional power to legislate in this field.
Last Thursday I introduced two additional proposals, which were in due course referred to the Committee on the Judiciary where the Fulbright and Peyote proposals were already pending. 1 submitted these two proposals, not in anywise to prejudice consideration of the two pending proposale, but rather to lay before the Senate nod the Committee on the Judiciary alternative procedures for consideration. As (linkman of the Judiciary Committee's Standing Subcommittee Oil Constitutional Amendments, i nnt aware of the need for a thorough and dispassionate study of this whole area of the law. It seemed to tile that a submission of these proposnis would contribute to such consideration. Of the two proposals which I have submitted, one would merely confer upon the Congreiet authority to prescribe by law the procedure for determinit,g tto inability of the President of the United States and the question of his Mutt to resume the powers find duties of that office. This propoeal has the benefit of brevity, which most persons are willing to concede is a commendable consideration in the drafting of constitutional amendments.
The other amendment, however, to more &tailed. This amendment would create a commission or conunit tee composed of the heads of the executive departments of the Government of the United States anti the majority and minority leaders of both Houses. The commission would be chaired by the Chief Justice of the United States, who would have no vote in the proceedings. It could be called into session by either the Vice President or upon written application of six of the members of the commission, addressed to the Chief Justice. The commission would call for such medical and other testimony as it desired and would be required to determine the question : Is the President able to discharge the powers and duties of his office? It a majority of the commission found that he was not able to perform the duties of his office, such powers and duties would then devolve upon the Wee President, who would continue to assume those powers and dnttes ontll the commission determined that the President was able to resume the powers and duties of his office.
The subcormnittee, therefore, will have before it what I believe are four baste approaches to a solution of this Problem, namely:
First. A simple amendment, granting Congress the authority to provide the detailed solution by statute, which is niece easily changed or adjusted to meet future contingencies, but which by that very fact also lacks the atability of constitutional amendment.
Second. A constitutional nmendment, conferring the power of decision in the matter upon the Supreme Court, following reference of the question to the Court by Congress.
Third. A constitutional amendment Setting up a commission which includes representatives of all three branches of Government, but which fidnitttedly is weighted in favor of the executive branch.
Fourth. A statutory approach.
I have not undertaken to discuss the issue of whether remedial legislation in this field must take the form of a constitutional amendment or may be accomplished by a simple statute. The former Attorney General, Herbert Brownell, has endorsed the view that the change should be mule by constitutional amendment. Certainly such a method would present no opportunity for challenge at some future critical period on constitutional grounds. On the other hand, a statute on the subject might invite such a challenge which could serve as a severe hindrance to essential action. 'I expect, however, that this question will be fully explored at hearings which, as chairman of the Standing Subcommittee on Constitutional Amendments of the Committee on the Judiciary, I have scheduled to begin on January 2i, 1958. I have discussed this problem and make this announcement at this time not by way of suggesting that the subcommittee intends to consider this Important subject in haste, but rather to alert those who are Interested and knowledgeab'e on this subject that the subcommittee desires and intends to take information and testimony looking to a solution of what is surely a difficult and vexatious problem. Whether,.after the subcommittee has
PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY	49
completed this Initial task It will prove more able to reach agreement on a solution than its predecessors have been, I cannot predict. I would suggest, that if we are not willing, in the light of our present knowledge, to undertake such a task, we will deserve the condemnation of those who must live with the uncertainties which our inaction will have served to perpeiunte.
I hope that any Senators or citizens who have any suggestions, Ideas, or proposals in this connection will see that they are sent to the Judiciary subcommittee.
Mr. President, I suggest the absence of a quorum.
The Paroccomo OFFICER. The clerk will call the roll.
The legislative clerk proceeded to call the roll.
Mr. KE.YAUVRR. Mr. President, I ask unamlnous consent that the order for the quorum call he rescinded.
Tice Pioantaxo 0k-ricrac. Without objection, it Is so ordered.
Senator KurAuvEn. The committee is highly honored to have as our next witness Prof. William Yandell Elliott, a native and distinguished son of Tennessee, who is professor of history at Harvard University, has taught and lectured in many of our principal universities, has served the Government in many important positions such as consultant to the President's Committee on Administrative Management, National Advisory Defense Committee, Office of Production Management, House Special Council Post-War Economic Policy and Planning, the War Production Board, and the Business Advisory Council. Dr. Elliott., both by experience and education and study is well qualified to give us the benefit of his views on this subject. Without objection, I will order the short biographical sketch of William Yandell Elliott, taken from Who's Who, printed at this place in the record.
(The biographical sketch referred to above is as follows ;)
Elliott, William Yandell, univ. prof.; b. Murfreesboro, Tenn., May 12, 1896; a. William Yandell and Annie Mary (Bullock) E.; A. B., Vanderbilt U., 1917, A. M., 1020; certificate Sorbonne, Paris, France, 1919; D. Phil., Coll., Oxford U., 1923; LL.D. in. Barbara Foster, June 28, 1023; children—William Yandell, Paul Pinkerton Foster, Charles James Fox Wharton; m. 21, Mary Louise Ward, Aug. 26, 1930; children—Ward Edward, David William Penn. Instr. Vanderbilt U., 191920; Instr. U. of Calif., 192.3-24, asst. prof., 1924-25; lecturer and tutor dept. of govt., Harvard, 1925-20, nsst. prof., 1925-20, asso. professor, 1929-31, professor since 1031, Williams professor of government 1912, dlr. of the Harvard summer school since 1050. Consultant to President's Committee on Administrn. Management 1036, Nat. Advisory Defense Comm., 1940, Office of Prodn. Management 1041, House Special Com. Postwar Econ. Policy and Planning, 1945-46; mem. Senator Tydings mission to Phillippines 1945; dir. Stockpile and Transportation Div., W. P. 13., vice china. Civilian Requirements; staff dir. House Select Coin. on Fgn. Aid. 1947-48: staff dlr. House Committee on Fgn. Affairs, 1047-49; asst. dir. 0. D. M. 1011413; mem. planning bd. Nat. Security Council since 1053; Served with 114th Field Artillery 30th Division, A. E. F.; 1st lieut. at close of World War I. Grad. mem. Business Advisory Council. Dept. of Commerce, dir. Foreign Service Edn. Found. Mem. Disciples of Christ. Editor: the British Commonwealth at War, 1913. Author: several books in political sd. 1928-10; Western Political Heritage (with N. A. McDonald), 1049; American Foreign Policy; Organization and Control, 1952. Home 660 Concord Avenue, Belmont. Office: Littauer M-28, Harvard Univ., Cambridge. Mass.
Member Sigma Chi, Phi Beta Kappa. Democrat.
Senator KEFAIIVER. We certainly appreciate your coming here and being with us, Mr. Elliott.
STATEMENT OF WILLIAM YANDELL ELLIOTT, PROFESSOR OF
HISTORY, HARVARD UNIVERSITY
Mr. Ewan. Mr. Chairman, I am of course very much honored to be here as a witness before this committee and I appreciate your kind introduction.
60	PRESIDENTIAL LIABILITY
If I could add a word to your own, I have also been a servant of the servants of the people in both Houses of Congress, as you well
know, sir, in preparing staff reports for both the Senate and the House, and as a staff director of the committee with which Senator Dirksen was then connected. I say this to recall to you these proofs of the respect that. I have for the Congress.
Senator KEFAUVER. Yes, in many capacities in both the House and the Senate.
(Discussion off the record.)
Mr. Er.ricrrr. The subject. that you are attacking, as Senator Dirk-sen remarked, is fraught with such great national importance that it might today affect our very survival as a free nation. But it is not simply a matter of the immediate moment that we are concerned with. It is as John Marshall said, "a Constitution that we are construing," and a Constitution that we are contemplating amending. We are approaching our second century under that Constitution, the foundation of our firm union.
The Constitution is a document hammered out of compromises by perhaps the greatest. feat of statesmanship that has been achieved by any system in bringing into being something that has survived as well as it has= basically the same in its grand design. But it attempted to provide, sir, for things that I think we had better bear in mind: not simply for the current situation with which the men of that time were confronted, but for the future.
Aristotle remarks in The Politics somewhere that• what seem small amendments of constitutional systems (what ho calls "basic laws") sometimes have unsuspected possibilities for destroying the whole structure. In other words what are apparently harmless innovations can have large and dangerous consequences. Therefore one must approach a constitutional amendment I hope in the spirit of seriousness, even reverence? which is shown by this committee; and at the same time not be frightened of having to deal by amendment with a situation that is not adequately covered, as I think it is a matter of common agreement this situation of who declares Presidential inability, and how, is not adequately covered. You can, if you chooses act under the doctrine of, not the "silence of Congress", in this instance, but under the silence of the Constitution, and try to torture out of it through the implied powers clause or the implied powers doctrine as it has become a part of our constitutional interpretation, some power of Congress to act through statute alone in this matter. I think that Senator Olfahoney has given us a very brilliant end soundly reasoned statement, grounded on his evident historical knowledge, as to the limits intended by this provision in the Constitution on congressional ability to determine inability by its own act, alone. He gave some very good reasons for thinking that on the ground alone of the history of article II, section 1, clause 6, it would be unwise to proceed by statute and probably unconstitutional. It would certainly involve us in doubts and ambiguities which had better be clarified once and for all in a way that only constitutional amendment can do with finality.
But were it perfectly legal to act by statute only, and constitutional beyond a doubt—as it is not, in spite of some authority to the contrary, I should suggest, sir, that the seriousness of this problem requires that
PRESIDENTaL INABILITY	51
the people of the United States not only understand it thoroughly but act upon it. with a speed worthy of the need for settling this issue once and for all and in our time today. I think you do go back to the people ultimately for your source of authority on a matter of this importance. It is to prevent their confusion and division of counsels and leaders that we have a Constitution.
Now I would like if I may, having paid homage to Senator O'Mahoney's remarkable constitutional exegesis, to differ somewhat with him in his conclusions. I would like further to lay groundwork for that difference as to method by reminding you of what I think is the basic nature of the separation of powers in our system.
The danger, I think to the separation of powers in our system does not come, certainly not at the present time, from any desire on the part of the Congress to usurp the prerogatives or the influence and lessen the prestige and the powers of the Executive of the United States. I think no one could have any doubts as to the patriotic attitude, completely transcending partisanship that Congress has so far displayed in this matter. But we are concerned with something that may not be merely meeting the current situation of a current crisis, but with something that deals with the future of our whole constitutional system. In that respect., I would like to remind you, sir, of the logic of the separation of powers and some dangers that it seems to me we run if we tamper with it by encroachment on the Executive ppwers, unintentional though it may bet by putting it in the hands of Congress to remove a President without impeachment.
In the first place, our system is unlike either the French or the British. Be reassured that I do not intend to lecture you on that difference but just to remind you of a couple of matters that I think need bearing in mind.
The French system creates inevitably and infallibly and alas, very painfully, a weak executive, by having a legislature that can at any time upset a government.. This makes the temptation of blocks and groups within the legislature so strong to reshuffle ministries even at the cost of bringing financial and defense policies into confusion, that we have had a history since the Third Republic, written in the most painful type; the red of inflation and the black of national pessimism and loss of confidence.
We certainly do not want to follow that path in any way whatever, and I think we are, under our present system of balance, in no danger of doing it. The British system, on the contrary, has a system in which the right to call a general election is the protection of an executive which is responsible to Parliament, i. e., to the House of Commons under existing practices. Therefore the Cabinet, headed by a real Prime Minister, is in a very strong disciplinary position to protect itself against encroachments and undermining by parliamentary maneuvers, not by ground swells of changes in real public support, It can and does exercise a discipline over unnecessary elections through snap votes of no confidence, a discipline so great that it has been almost unheard of to have a vote of no confidence in the British Parliament, since World War I. The one instance since that time where this withdrawal of support in effect took place was not inside the halls of Parliament or the House of Commons, but outsidat in a political club, by what was in effect a caucus vote to end a coalition.
62	PREBIDENTIAL INABILITY
Now we are in neither position,' the weak French executive or the tightly disci lined British. The President of the United States is unable to call a general election to test the sentiment of the country. He is, as Senator Olifahoney has reminded us, elected by all the people. Along with' the Vice President, he is the only nationally elected figure. Congressmen, oven Senators, do not represent the Nation at large. He can and sometimes does run well ahead of his party' in terms of national Confidence and the voters' expression of party support in the legislative halls:
The legislature is not, infrequently, as President Hoover's. letter reminds us, I believe, of a different party complexion. This happens frequently with both parties. I remember serving as staff director for the Honse Foreign Affairs Committee in a Republican Congress when President Truman was President of the United States, the 80th Congress, and surely we have seen more recent evidences of it. President Hoover lost his Congress. President Wilson did from 1918, so did Cleveland, and so on. This is far from being abnormal, if we consider the frequency with which our 2-year elections bring it about.
Nowi given the fact that we have had very few instances (through "inability" or, better,"disability") what was, in' effect, having "no President," in our history—and these'have already been adequately alluded to and developed by Senator Olialioney and others—it, new ertheless,
is a very necessary thing to cure any such possibility at this period where quick decisions must be had, but cure it without at the same time running the risk that at some future time we may find a Congress removing a President from partisan motives because they were expressing a wave of national hysteria like that after the reconstruction period when the impeachment of Johnson narrowly failed, even protected by the two-thircld provision for the Senate's judgment by votes. Such a risk should make the power of the Congress to act alone on this matter of determining succession by statute, or by joint resolution sanctioned by statute, a real danger by permitting a funds, mental but unintended change in our separation of powers.' Leaving the decision to action by Congress alone, I think, is unwise on two counts, sir. It is unwise, first; because, as your questions to Senator O'Malioney indicated, there is a great deal of well-grounded opinion that in the circumstances that One might be confronted With, the eum-brous action' of a, legislative body with all the possibilities of wrangling, tactics of delay by blocks, filibusters, and so on; it would be exceedingly difficult to get quick and certain decision from Congress. This alone would make congressional action not the appropriate rem, edy for that kind of decision.
- Furthermore, any. such debates, and the inevitable changes of par. tisan motives in any doubtful cases, would cause a great deal of hard feelings. It would exacerbate many situations if' there were real divisions on this point. To delay and debate would probably be an unnecessary thing in terms Of the other available alternatives that I think are preeented in some of the resolutions before this contnittee that may well be preferable.
•	' But were it possible for Congress in all cases to act With the utmost expedition and sPeed, and to act either through'the somewhat.archaio devide of hating the House vote by States with one vote to each State (the method that would be used if the electoral college has failed to
PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY	53
come to a solution), or by joint resolution of both Houses, Senate and House, both acting in either case, were this perfectly possible, were Congress capable of being called rapidly into session and acting on 24 hours' notice or some such thing as that, without real inquiry and debate—and I think this unlikely and, perhaps, unwise—it would, nevertheless, be very questionable in my mind as to whether this would be the right method of determining either the disability or the return to ability of the President of the Umted States.
I want to treat my reasons for that conclusion very briefly under two points. The first is the danger that an unintentional upset in the balance that has been set up in our Constitution by the separation of powers would be achieved. I say "unintentional" because I think no one would expect Congress to operate in this kind of an atmosphere in that kind of a way, but as I reminded you in the beginning, this is the Constitution we are talking of, that governs the future
behavior of all sorts of Con	One of the strong points of the
men at the Constitutional nvention was that they showed a very accurate view of the failings of human nature, the fact that in times of high passions and, perhaps, a very grave crisis where a decision might be fatal in one way or the other or where division in the country could be even more painful,, en action like that in the impeachment of Johnson would le possible through this device, and would be much easier, because it might, under some of the proposed amendments or statutes, be done by a bare majority vote.
Now the Senator from Wyoming, graciously, with the statesmanlike help of his wife (this morning) said a two-thirds majority in each House would be all right on this point of congressional action, to meet his ideas. I would say this would be a far less objectionable method of dealing with the thing, except for its cumbersomeness. If swift action is also a requisite, the two-thirds protection can increase the delay. You would remove at least the hair-trigger character of the act; you would make it possible to protect against partisan passions in some degree. But, even so, I think ikis not the way in which to be expeditious.
There is yet another point to remember. Congress is not the best equipped body, at large and as a whole, to have knowledge of the President's real 'condition.
Let me start out, sir, by saying that I am convinced that the present President, like any President who confronts this problem of possible illness in such times of perpetual crisis, sees the necessity of action, Prefers that it be, as far as rcan make out from his words; done in an unambiguous and clear way. He has made some recommendations of his own for the consideration of the Congress:, as I understand it. I hive not followed those closely, but I gather that they are somewhat paiallel to President HooVer's suggestion here, although he would pre-fei an amendment 16 a statute. The President probably has worked out understandings with the Vice President to deal with emergencies
not covered by his own free decision compos	.
In lv tinie of national peril, where quick action and the ability to respond immediately must be known by the enemy as the most valuable part of Our deterrent to aggression; it is, obvious that we do haVe to have a situation that prevents us from having a President in a comal a President who cannot operatk; ti ,Preiddeni Who could net make'-decisions of that sort, yet a President whom the Vice President would
54	PRESIDDIcriAL I ABILITY
feel reluctant to relieve of all his duties decisively and at once. If we
•	took no other example than that of Wilson, the painful4,period described by Senator O'Malionoy, with the insight into the workings of :what passed for Presidential decisions in the White House, ought to remind us of that danger forever.
We were, in effect. governed for a considerable period of time by the President's personal physician and the second Mrs.• Woodrow Wilson, as a transmission belt for all-executive policies from a man
•	really ooill to make decisions. What harm was done by that to the possibility that we mi_ght have had a League of Nations with compro-nuse,s which Abbott Lawrence Lowell tola me, he had almost gotten .the President to agree to, before he became too ill; and became so entrenched • in his "advocacy that he would make no concessions to the .Senators' amendments, and so on. One can only Speculate on that., but it is obvious that such a history could be repeated at some time,
if	today. Therefore, we do need, let us agree, a method that is sound, foolproof, constitutionally clear and unambiguous, and capable Of being put through, I hope, with some speed, because it seems reasonable to all sides.
- Now I know reasonable men can disagree as to methods.. I hope they will, because you often bring out some of the weaknesses of solutions by pointing to the difficulties that they raise. But in - 'ke resolutions that you have kindly furnished me in the day or two that I had to prepare for this, I have looked them through with a good deal of care, and I think they each have a good deal of merit.
For install(); Senator Payne's.resolution here, which would leave it up to the President, effectively contains at least:one item that, it seems to me, is missing in tome of the other resolutions, not, Senate Joint Resolution 141, by Senator O'Malioney, or the recommendations from Mr. Hoover, and, I thinks Mr. Truman; namely, that there should be some recognition that the President himself may well initiate, close, and finally determine his inability, not by resignation, necessarily, from his office, but by saying that he is unable to. discharge his constitutional duties and that the Vice President must take over as Acting President..
Iii that ease, the language that Senator Payne's resolution uses, though it is addressed to a statute and not to a-constitutional amendment, would seem to me to be appropriate to incorporate in any of the constitutional amendments.
I think that is one of the few things, Mr. Chairman, that I noticed, perhaps, is not entirely covered in your own resolutions, particularly Senate Joint Resolution 134.
This may be taken for granted in your resolution, and the others. One may say, that there is no necessity of covering voluntary action by• the President: But it surely ought to be recognized as clear. law that the determination of the President himself as to his inability ought to be cenclusive, ought to be a definitive matter and should
merely be communicated to CongresS as a fact.	•
Senator KEPAIIVER. For the record, you were talking about S. 238
in discussing Senator Payne's language?
•	Mr. ELmorr. I was talking about Senate Joint Resolution 238,
yes.
,•Senator ICEFATIVIR. Subsection- (b) I
" PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY	55
Mr. ELLIOTT. Subsection (a), sir, at the top of page 2: "In case of the•physical inability of the President to discharge the powers and duties of office as President, he shall so notify the Congress by written communication" and so on.
Now, then, the only thing that I am not quite clear about in Mr. Paynes language here, and I think this is raised in a very interesting
way by former President Truman's views as expressad in his letter, is whether the President is his own best judge of whether he should resume his powers. There I think it is very much more questionable as to whether once having turned over his powers to the Vice President., there should not be at least some check on his resuming his powers. There would be no question of a man who is really in possession of his faculties and his conscience not taking over powers when he felt ready to resume them. But on the other hand, a President sometime in the future,looking at this in long-run terms, who was subject to some aberrations or something of that sort, might well plunge the country into an extremely difficult situation if he asserted powers which he was manifestly not capable of holding, at some time in which he had been allowed to do this by unchecked decision of his own. So I would not be equally clear on that point and I merely flag it for your attention as something that deserves careful consideration when you are dealing with the resumption of his office.
Now on the question of the other resolutions, find myself in some minor disagreement or perhaps it could be a major disagreement with that great friend of mine, Senator Fulbright. Senator Fulbright has done two things in his resolution :
Senator ICErauvea. You are not/ referring to Senate Joint Resolution 100V
Mr. Etoorr. I am now referring to Senate Joint Resolution 100. In effect, Senator Fulbright's resolution suggests that whenever the two Houses of Congress shall adopt a resolution declaring ,that the Congress believes the President is unable by reason of physical or mental disability to' discharge the powers and duties of his office, such resolution shall be transmitted to the Supreme Court ,of the United States and the Court shall decide whether or not such inability °xis's. If the Court decides by a majority vote of the authorized membership that such inability exists, the powers and duties shall devolve upon the Vice President or if there be no Vice President, and so On.
Now this has at least the advantage that there is a check on Congress and there is, in that sense, in the tradition of checks and balances, a protection against some future usurpation of power by pressure of Congress.. It may not be that the actual decision itself would ever need to take place. But the capacity of Congress to declare disability by its own action alone could be a strong coercive factor in the dealings of Congress with the Executive. That is why I so much 'agree with Senator O'Mahoney that the committee on style,''in drafting this, being true to the resolution that it had before it, really did nbt intend to convey that power on Congress.'* That is my own feeling aboht it, and I -believe that is also your expressed view, Mr.. Chairman.
1 r•	•
I would think that at` least a Very treasonable view which 'would
make more solemn and difficult proceeses then are contemplated by
56	PRL13IDENTIAL INABILITY
Senate Joint Resolution 100 unless backed by amendment. Reasonable men can differ on the interpretation of something like this, and people would argue possibly that having gone to the country without a full explanation in the Federalist papers and since the debates in the constitutional convention in the States did not establish anything definite as to meaning in ratifying, a broad latitude might be
Corwin,
under the "implied powers" of Congress. Prof. Edwin Corwin, one of our most vigorous and authoritative writers on the Constitution, does make the argument for implied powers—but to my mind for one, with more authority than persuasion.
But for reasons that I have urged, I would prefer the constitutional amendment route for decisive clarity, even were there a much clearer case for the eossible validity of statutory action.
Now Senator Fulbright's resolution, coming back to his main point here, associates the Court as the check, but it does put the initiation in the Congress, subject to all the disabilities from my point of view of debates, length of time, stirring up the country by an unnecessary wrangling on a point of this sort, and perhaps not being close enough to the realities of the situation to be the best. judges of it.
The Court is no closer to this side of the problem—the political—if I understood the language thnt was read from the Court as I came in. The Court has itself expressed its opinion on the impropriety of being drawn in, and I would fully concur with the wisdom of the learned Justices in refusing to do something that savors more of a political act under the doctrine that the Court has always used as you will recall avoiding decisions that called for political choice rather than judicial decision, by a judicial finding of law.
Nor would I be very much encouraged to bring in another element of judgment of fact by associating medical ad-Vice as a conclusive factor, as is so often proposed, on which to base the finding either of a court or any other type of quasi-judicial committee. I think any committee in its right mind would want to have medical advice, but I am, I think, sufficiently acquainted with the medical profession to know that they differ very radically in their diagnoses and their political opinions often seem to have a very considerable bearing on their medical findings.
I am reminded, if I may say so, of the opinion of one of my own very learned medical colleaguesi a man of the highest reputation at Harvard, who found that President Truman, by one of these dangerous in absentia diagr!oses, was suffering from some obscure form of ailment that made him, what shall. I say, not quite non compos mends, hut temporarily aberrational over periods of time and sub-
dect to rages,.Which my medical friend thought could be treated by rugs. He cited successful preventive treatment of several of his patients. I am glad to say he was not allowed to prescribe for President Truman on that basis or he might not. have had the reaction that the President did have in a fit of justified wrath in taking up the Communist challenge in Korea that I think was very useful.
And drugs used perhaps in another instance in Mr. den's case may well have been responsible for a certain lack of 'responsibility in at least taking the preparations to carry out what he .Was.com-initting his country to. I do not know, but that is quite a usual view today in informed British circles.
PRFAIDENTIAL INABILITY	57
Diagnosis, medical prescription, has to be taken as all other things do, and as the Court takes them, In terms of reasonable interpretation. The ultimate evaluation has to be by people who are really close to ti-e situation.
Now I may say, sir, you know we have differed on the wisdom of question periods for the Cabinet members by the Houses of Congress. So it is without any flattery to you, Mr. Chairman, that having read these resolutions, I am more attracted, after analysis, to the resolutions that bear your name than to any of the others. But I have 1 or 2 suggestions to make which might alter some language, if you are going to keep the whole of the executive heads of the executive departments in there. That is like Sanhedrin. Lloyd George said you cannot win a war with a Sanhedrin. I do not know who the heads of the executive departments are, but the language—
Senator KEPAuvER. Mr. Elliott does me the favor of referring to Senate Joint Resolution 134.
Mr. Eutorr. Yes, that is the long form rather than the short form. Senator KEFAUVER. The resolution that I introduced.
Mr. EmoTr. I may, say I prefer it to your short form, Senate Joint Resolution 133, for the reason that I am going to develop.
This resolution, the Kefauver Senate Joint Resolution 134, says, in effect, that—
For the purpose of determining inability of the President to discharge the powers and duties of the office of President, there is hereby established a committee consisting of the Chief Justice of the linityl States, who shall serve as chairman of such committee, and who shall have no vote in any of Its proceedings.
I think that meets the Chief Justice's objection to judicial participation by the Court. Here he is only a symbolic figure, symbolic of the majesty of the law, but taking no voting part in the proceeding. He serves as something like the British Crown, which is there to remind all officials in Britain of the fact that they do have a common symbol of the law. This role for the Chief Justice would, I think, have a very salutary effect in whatever group has to make a decision of this kind.
Therefore, I would myself warmly support this language. This
is not the full Court. This is not addressing itself to the problem as a Court. This is simply having the Chief Justice preside, if I understand it, at such a meeting.
Senator ICEFAuvER. That is the intention to just have him preside, to see that there was a fair committee hearing. I thought the precedent for this was the Chief Justice presiding in impeachment proceedings in the United States Senate.
Mr. EmoTr. It seems to me to be a very sound precedent and one that reminds all concerned of the fact that this is a constitutional issue of the gravest importance fraught 'with the safety of the Nation. The presence of the Chief Justice I think could not but be beneficial under-those conditions.
The leader in the Senate of the political party having the greatest number of Members, the leader of the party having the second greatest number of Members in the Senate, the leader in the House and minority leader and heads of the executive departments of Government.
58	ritEsiDENTIAI, INAMMT11'
Now the only language Ilmt I know of that, deals with "heeds of the executive departments" that l can remember (and it has Iron lb years since 1 taught constitutional law and 1111401T, but I think my 1110111011' is accurate 011 the point that deals with the execut ye depart-
ments, is that the Piesident	welkin II, art loin '2, soot inu '2, "Ile
may minim the opinion in writing of tlw principal Oliver in each of the executive departments," and so on.
That is the sole constitutional reference, Stone people have said w
there as no referrnee to 0NeelliiV0 depart 11101141, Prilat 18 1101 so. II is in there.
But the principal Aker of the executive departments in the meaning of (ho Constitution may not mean the same thing as Omgress means IT setting up a "department" by law as different front nu "4.r,ones. There may well ho ogondes of far mom impoonneo 111 some waZ'S than 1101111 l'i 11101118. 'flit' fart. that tho President has some of them 111 his Cabinet, the fact. that Congress in its wisdom has s0011 lit to ',tire them statutory mendwrship on the National Security Connell, the Office of Defense Mobilization, borom flint oil) Notiono Seen. city Resources Board set up by the Nat mimI Security Act of 1917, and reiterated in 1010.
This is, I think, not reek mini end I would lied it therefore inv-fol—and I believe that possibly President Hoover's letter has some real point to it in that way----lo 11111110 he 111101111011 egenvies. I know+ that, )ti partieularly necessary because not all the exeent ire departments are of equal &wows to tho President or of equal importance in their knowlettgo of onIjoatill security policits. and perhaps in Ow Stature of the men themselves. Whoever mikes this decision in the. 0X0C1161'0 departments or in the legislative departments must repro. :vat something that transcends partisanship, I think we are all in agreement on that,
•
As far 
as this constitutional provision is capable of fissuring it., the !men who make this decision should be people who are thinking in terms of the country and who:v daily jobs force thorn to think of that. under an oath to support. the Constitution, retinr than to show loyaly to any man. "No man is above the law," said V. S. v. Lee. Its is a thing that we should always remind ourselves of.
Now my own view, sir is that you might choose for this task the regular members of the National Security Council; the *ureteric:. of State, Defense' ODM, Treasury. The Secretary of the Treasury was a member of the Security Council, by invitation under Mr. Truman quite as much AS under Mr. Eisenhower. I think that this Department is of a stature so important as to, deserve this recognition. I do not want to try to spell all this out; but I would think possibly the 13ud1,*et Bureau, because there is a man my close to the President. and yet, in some sense a servant of the Congress too, someone who was
l_et up by Congress. and who is supposed toilet as a watchdog,. You. might by that. method get 7 or 8 heads of agencies, close to the President, but chosen for their great. ability and patriotism, I think they would have to be 7 or 8, if you were going to follow through with your idea of having four Memberi of the LegiWature,.even though these four are split 'between theparties, Something of that order—there should possibly be a more definitive treatment of it in the light of President Hoover's very interesting suggestion, in your final drafting.
Pit P.811)NNTIA to INA liflorrY	50
Now there is one other thing that is eovered by President Truman's euggestion In his letter I hat I would recommend for the attention of the committee, and then I think 1110(1 bet lEqr yield mysel f to questions. I apologize for Inking Ho 11111ell 111110.
i101111101' KEVAIIVE11. Y011r digelISS1011 Is very helpful and you fake fill I Ito I hilts f l4nl ‘'011 wish.
11:1,1,10.1'r. 1 know you are all very busy torn 111141 1 do net, W11111 It, 1111110SO fits you. Ha if you look et the suggest ions that Former President Truman makes, I rather quest inn one recommemInt loin Possibly it. came from his own nalerid feeling, which may have emee out of being a Vico President who took over. Ile woishi not have liked to linen somemus 1'411110 btlek froth f Ito delta or the near fiend or elsewhere 111111 tell him not to hike over permanently, but to get. out after golf ing 141111.1e41. I refer to his muggested Innguago about the Vire l'roiiilent designated Ils President who would "thereupon serve out the 11111 farm of his predecessor." Should the striekee President achieve complete recovery, he would not. he entitled to repossess the office, apparently-if I have eorri,ct ly understois I the Woe go.
1 do not, think flint is 111010 in neCO111111/4% with Ilse 11111111111te of the people. They elected this man, and if he does fully recover !Unwell-mid there hi nn reason to believe that this 1101% not 1111111/M1 1111(1 1111f4 110t happened- --ymi wouhl !Hive n situation in which he was elimieated once And for all. I do not want to attribute nay motives to Mr. Til-me n) or to try /OSUMI what his reasons for flint were, whether because of his own experience or anything else, but. I would simply beg leave to disagree with the result that. seems to be plainly intended.
(hi the other handl I would think very favorably of waling down a pnint, which 1 think ra raised by Senator 01Mulioney. Ile has pointed out, if 1 may rend it once more, the exact language of article II) section 1, chaise 6: "Declaring what officers shall then act as President (in the case of the disability), both of the President and the Vice President," as you noted, Senator,"deelatieg what officer shall then act as President; and such officer hall then net until the disability is removed."
Now accepting your views on this as I do, is it not rather strange that there is no mention of "officers shall also net as Vice President?" grime is no mention of Vice President in here, and so far as I know, there is no really direct handlingpf this lack in any of the resolutions. When Mr. Truman became President, we did not have a Vice President, and this has happened over and over again.
Now is this not a loophole that should be plugged?
Senator O'AfAllIONEY. I think it. is not strange, if 1 may interject at this point, Dr. Elliott, that the drafters of the Constitution did not take that. matter into consideration,
because obviously they were as, owning that in most cams the Vice President would act as President for only a short time, and one of the elements that convinces me that it was their intention always that. the Vice President should only be an Acting President is the provision with respect to the election of the President.
' Mr. Etuarr. Yes, but the election of the President. can equally well be interpreted as a regular election, and there is nothing that .I know of in the debates to suggest that that was not in their minds. In other words, there was no provision for a special election in their minds that I know of.
60	PRMIDENTIAL INABILITY
Senator O'bfAiioNnY. Yes, I agree with you in that respect.
Mr. Er t.iorr. And unless they expected the electoral college to func-
tion in some way retrospectively as is suggested again I think, is it
not, in the hoover or the Triune') letter?
Senator Dnissniq. President Truman's letter, "reconvene the elec-
toral college."
Mr. Flom. Yes, here it is.
I would recommend that In every instance whore a Wee President succeeds to an unexpired term or President the electoral college be convened to choose a new Vice President.
Weil, I do not really know whether that is the right way to do it, but I have considered this with some care and I am hanged if I do know how to get a Vico President under this kind of situation. If you let Congress choose him, as would seem a simple method of doing it, by either both Houses or something, you have got a terrific wrangle on.
In the second place, you do not have as a result of congressional action a Vioe President who necessarily shares in any way the views of the President. It is imperative in our system today, more than ever, that the Vice President should assume very wide duties, and should be in line of succession, should be in the National Security Council, and so forth. Again, I refer to President Truman. You will remember how handicapped lie felt he was in assuming his duties in the National Security Council without having really been schooled in them. He obviously did not want to let that happen again.
So I think he has a very important point in his letter which I would hope that this subcommittee would take seriously. I really do not know a better way of handling it than the one he has proposed.
Yet I admit that it seems to me to be not a very good way.
One possible suggestion which people have sometimes canvassed is that the President should propose to the Congress, someone for Vice President. But suppose Congress does not accept the President's nominee? Well, then you possibly would have to have a national election. But it is not always very easy to call a national election to elect one man and to get a real response from the country. So perhaps President Truman's advice is as sound as any on this point that the electoral college was elected by the same party that elected presumably the President, and reflects the majorities of that time. You are not trying to reflect a new situation in the mandate front the people because the 4-year term is a part of our system. And you cannot really reflect a total picture of the country's feelings without a national general election on the issues.
We do not remove the President simply because he has lost his parliamentary majority, so to speak, and for the very good reason that I tried to point out at the beginning. He has no protection. He cannot call a general election to find out whether the country supports him or the Con?gress.
Our system is not geared to that. You know, sir, I have made some proposals in other tunes and other places which I regard as out of bounds here, which I think might deal with that more fundamental problem. But this type of radical reform of our whole system of 2-year elections is so far afield that I do not regard that as a practical suggestion to intrude my ideas about constitutional reform; or even the possibility of having the President's family represented in both
PRESIDENTIAL INARILITY	61
Houses in order to take care of the chairman's, Senator Kefauver, concern about, answering questions. I think again if the Cabinet: members are going to answer questions, they had better have votes, and be entitled to the full privileges of debate and membership. This is a very far-reaching business, and it, might, have real dangers. I (un aware of (how, too, in getting the back up of the representatives of the people by having a block of official inlrlidera. You know parliamentary bodies do have this reaction about official majorities and I am not unaware of it.
Themfore, I amjust raising this narrower issue with you of taking care that there shall also always be a Viso President. I do not have, for once, any kind of pet solution, and 1 really am stumped on it, but 1 think t he suggestion is well worth conaiderai
Now, sir, there aro many other things that I could go on and try to talk about, but I would like to conclude with one matter of such im-pertain.° that 1 would like to call it to your attention and again say that I have no particular remedy for it.
We live in tunes when it, is possible and I hope never probable and if we take the necessary action in time and with sufficient vigor it would not be probable, to have a surprise attack delivered on this city which would wipe out. the entire Government. I would not, like to go into this except, in executive session, but I think you are all well aware from your several duties in other parts of the Senate and from your general acquaintance as Senators with all that, has been discussed now, that this is not an impossibility, though it is a had dream.
Now under those conditions, is the act of succession that we are now operating under adequate? Might, it, not be the case that in order to have no ambiguity about. the Government, we should have not only the Congress covered by it, because the Congress might be in session, not only the Cabinet, covered by this act of succession, but some provision for State governors in some form to get together and try to choose one of their number, if there were nobody else available for this? I think that this could be covered by statute, because it is within—I do not know what, your view would be, sir, but I should think it would be covered by the Succession Act under article II, section 1, clause O. It, is a provision which we would pray and hope would never of course occur, but in any such time of extreme disaster and peril as that, if this Nation is to survive as a people, it, would be important to have met any possible contingency in advance. To do this helps to prevent temptation.
What is more important perhaps is to leave no loophole to a prospective enemy who thinks by a surprise blow at the heart of the Nation he could cripple us. This is something I think the Senate—
Senator LANGER. The Senate has had a bill before it to take care of that situation.
Mr. Emnyrr. Good, sir. I am very relieved to hear it. I do not know the bill and would not of course therefore express an opinion, but it is very gratifying to me to know that in your deliberations you have considered that also.
Mr. ICEFAUYER. Suppose for the record we print the bill in the appendix so that we can have reference to
(The bill. S. J. Res. 8, 84th Cong., 1st sess., as passed the Senate is printed on p.241.)
22324-5S------5
62	PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY
Senator OntiroNzir. Such a bill might normally go to the committee having jurisdiction over civil defense.
The Civil Defense Act was written to prepare for defense against just such a contingency, but it never included the destruction of the Government.
' Senator LANGER. Oh, yesi it included the destruction not only of the President and Vice President, but a majority of the Congress. Senator OlfaiioNizy. That is right, it does.
Mr. Siurrnsr. Senator, do you have in mind the resolution which the chairman of this subcommittee proposed in the last Congress,. by which State governors could have appointed Representatives in time of emergency or disaster?
Senator LANGER. That is right. That is the bill.
Mr. SMITHEY. That, sir, was the resolution of the chairman of this subcommittee which was reported by the committee and passed by the Senate in the last Congress.
Mr. Emicrrr. If that is the case, I am simply in ignorance of it, and .I hope that something of that sort will deserve the attention of the Congress because it seems to me to be of great importance.
Senator DIRRSEN. Dr. Elliott, conceivably a majority could be wiped .out of both bodies and you could not do business without the necessary quorum.
Mr. Eutaw. Legally we would be in a very curious situation. Senator DIRKBvN. So if you had to wait on a special election
Mr. Emiorr. That is precisely the point. I did not think it necessary to develop that very much further because I was sure you would recognize the importance of it.
Now one final  and concluding remark, if I may, Mr. Chairman. I have said in general that I support your resolution, which seems to me to be quite carefully drawn, as against the other resolutions. However, I just say that it seems m° there is nothing inherently illogical in the following proposition.
I would favor eliminating the Vice President completely from this busine& of determining the inability of the President or having a voting part in it. That is not because the Vice President would be "ambitious" or anything of that sort. On the contrary, I think he might lean over backward against declaring the President unable, in order not to be accused of being ambitious. I do not refer to this Vice President. I make no reference to that. His conscience and his sense of national duty is,I think, as good as any man's that r know, and sometimes a little btter. But the point is that any Vice President might take this attitude, and if he did vote, he'would undoubtedly be traduced by people who would say something about his motives. Therefore, I would think it would be useful not to expose him to this kind of thing. This is a matter of course that you will exercise, your own judgment on completely as you 'do on all other matters. But I think in terms of just the impact on the opinion of the country and the position of freeing the Vice President of any leaning over backward on the one hand or of the accusation of ambition on the otheri it -would be useful to 'eliminate him.
If that were done, sir,as you cut down the number of the executive departments, I really raise a que,stion about whether you need to put in the leaders of both Houses and so on, more than to say that this committee should consult with them, you see, to get their views? to be sure that they have taken the temper of Congress in this thing,
PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY
because to mix up voting in this way, this selected group of them is I think unnecessary and leads to a certain amount of mixing of functions, and would be much simpler if you would put it in in some form of that: kind.
Senator KEFAUYER. Senator Langer, do you wish to ask Dr. Elliott some questions
Senator LANGER. I have no questions.
Senator ICEFAUVER. Senator Dirksen?
Senator DIRKSEN. No; but I think Dr. Elliott has been a very good witness this afternoon. I have just one observation to make. I quite agree with your observations with respect to the Vice President, because inherently he would be confronted with this old conflict-of-interests idea.
Mr. Emtcrrr. And he might lean over backward and he probably would. That is the thing that frightens me about this. He really would not be willing to say the man was unable to perform the duties
of his office. He would ther	I er himself of accusations of
self-interest and he migl just do the wr g king through trying to avoid it.
Senator KxF 16ER. I might at that point expla'14 my thinking of how the Vice resident is brougl tin in the resolutib Senate Joint
Resolution	It	• tention to 1 ve the power
ht feel_ at he sho ld take
hey always have,	would
you do ye alter-so that sik mem-epende'ly of the
to express my thanks to
Dr. Elliott for his very fine presentation here.	• •
' Senator KEFAUVER. Yes; we are all certainly very grateful to Dr. Elliott who has given of his time to come to Washington.by his own means to inform this committee; It has certainly been a very excellent,
dissertation and discussion that he has presented. • •	• • •	: • • • •	•
Senator DIRKSEN. Well, it is an urgent matter now.
Senator KEFAUVER. No question about	. •
Senator DIRKSEN. And 'it is • a 'rather. wonderful - thing that. the President is so Completely uninhibited in discusstrig- the niatte'r. Ho is the very essence of candor and lays it' all 'out in' all the dkCus.4ions
we have had.	• • •	. 
Mr. Ei.i,tcri-r. May I make one observation on that,Sirt A PreSi-
dent might feel very reluctant to resign on his own initiative for
of the Vi but also the inab'
It pr of The for th them.
I 111 ught th
over, ut becau	luctan
rather lave a co	upon $.
Mr. 'LLorrr.	kv
ve eregAlii
native a proach	it. Thit-as_to• y
ben or hatever it is of tha	up-cot
Vice PI 'dent.
4, which 1 fil President) have a Mod of ity of the resident vides that At en-41 ommittee, or a maj convening of the
I)
as it is now in the •
'shin	committee to	ide upon
ident S/--\ks for the nvening em rs o the corn ttee ask f Justice should convene
Senator EFAUYER. OU would lint Oli	nt constitu-
tional right f the Vice	'dealtito take over, how •er.
Mr. Ewen. Oh, no; I do not eliminate that at 1, but I do not
think he should	his own judge of when the	sident is disabled.
That is the point.	kes over in an case. Senator LANCER. Mr. air
64	PRbilinastriAl,
disabuity,,momi Ito had tht,:backihg of this kind of finding. Do
you see what. I am talking about?
Senator 011liAnotir.v.‘ Yes surely.
Ei.t,nyre. You know, it looks like quitting. This might ben
real protection to the	deeper inner sense of duty. There is a conflict in a (whin sense that any conseient ions num might well have, confronted with this kind of decision, "Shoillilti lake this decision upon myself mid quit," the first time in history that It President ever quit, Not. this President alone, hut. any President, Well, if he had the protection of this kind of a method of determination, it. would make it very much easier for him to be guided by his real conscience.
Senator (AfAttoNEv. Mr, Chairman, may- I say I am HMS we are nil very much impressed, as i always have been, whenever I have had the line opportmilti of listening to Dr. Elliott. It has hem a stimu-
lating statement which ho has math, and 1 11111 sure it win provoke
thought on all of our parts.
I did, however, want to make this conillielit, I was Het persuaded by the doctor's argument. nbout the separation of powers, We are dealing here with the determination of the disability of the President. It. has nothing to do with the legislative power 11(1r with the executive power to ea fore() the laws. We Ore concerned only with finding the best forum to determine whether or not the Chief Exeentive is mud& to perform the duties of the office. That is the only question !hat is here.
The alternatives that are presented to yon are of going to bodies which arc somehow, some way separated from the people. The Cabinet. is appointed by the President, not by the people, not elected. The Supreme Court and nil the Justices of the Supreme Court are appointed by the President and continued by the Senate. The Primident and the Vice President, as I have alreaily said, are the only officers who are elected by all of the people, and the suggestion of having Congress make this determination is based man] the actual fact, that the Congress is the only existing body which conies with authority from the people.
The amendment List we propose here does not in any sense invade the executive power nor does it touch the legislative power. The Constitution left a gap. There was 110 method provided for determining whether or not a disability actually existed, and I still feel that the method suggested in S. J. Res. 141 is the better method.
As a matter of fact, I would say that leaving the power, or vesting the power, of determining the disability of the President or the Acting President in the hands of the Cabinet or in the hands of a political party would itself be a violation of the powers of the people. It might even be a violation of the doctrine of the separation of powers.
Now let. me say just another word with respect, to the comment. that Dr. Elliott, made on President Truman's suggestion. I agree with him.
One must remember in considering this matter that when the Constitutional Convention created the office of Vice President, they were singularly at a loss to know what to give him to do.
Mr. Eworr. That is right.
Senator OWAHONEY. And finally they decided that, he would preside over the Senate.
1111.44114:N1 IA14 INAIIILITY	65
Mr. ELLurer. Thal is right.
Senator U MAinniev. That seems to me to be oonclusive evidence that they were creating an office .which should amine temporarily the duties of the Chief Executive when any of these contingencies arose, in an noting capacity. I do not feel that, it in necessary for us to provide for the election of another Vice President by the electoral college which has dimly been robbed of practically all of its eelecting powers.
Senator Kv,rnoven. 1)0 you wish to MAO sonic further comments? Mr. &Luna% I would like to make a very short, comment on that, because it is so import ant,1111 observation.
In the first. place, (eking up the lust one first, if. stems to Hie flint the health of the Vice President is normally manned to be better than flint of the President, but, there is no guaranty of this whatever.
Senator OIMAIIONEY. None whatever.
Mr. ELMOTri There might be a disability of the Vice President without anybody to step into his shoes, you see, and I would like never to leave that gap, that is all. I think President Truman, conscious of this thing, has, it seems to me, made a most useful suggestion about it, which 1 would like to leave there.
Senator Kernuven. While you are on that, subject, about having a second Vice President when the Vice President takes over the powers and ditties of the President, President Truman suggests the reconvening of the electoral college which you think is as good a plan as has been suggested elthough you are not satisfied with it. How about the President or the Acting President proposing, nominating a Vice Proident to be ratified either by the Senate or by the electoral college.
Mr. Eworr. I did suggest that, sir, as a hasty thought on my part, but I have not thought it out enough to he at all confident about it. If they turned him down, as I suggested, then he would be in a rather curious position. You would have another stalemate. Maybe the President would have to come to an accommodation with them and work out somebody they could agree on. I would myself rather lean to that, but I do not want, to rule out President Truman's ideas.
The reason I do not want to rule out the use of the last electoral college rests precisely on the point that Senator O'Mahoney raised about my first suggestion: The electorate that elected first the House of llepre.sentatives and then the Senate of the United States, both Houses, may not be at all the same electorate that elected the President of the United States. The difference of votes between the two parties in Congress and for the Presidency in terms of partisanship might be quite different even in a presidential election year. You are dealing with the parties in Congressust as much as in the exeen-tive department and perhaps more so. I personally would like a 4-year term for the House and 8 for the Senate. Actually, the people whom the President appoints to his official family for these high offices are, in some sense, the inheritors of his policies more than anybody else could be, and they represent that Presidential mandate from the Nation at large, though indirectly, in a way that I dare say is at least the equal of anything that you would find in the reflection of a Congress elected quite often on kcal issues, Senator.
Senator UM:MONEY. Oh, I think that is a very sound theory.
66	PRFIDENTIAL INABILITY
Mr. Emiorr. No,. Senator. It is a fact that this Nation was de-Prived of your services on what I regard as one of the most unfortunate local issues that I can think of—wool—and I'm a woolgrower myself—but I don't vote just on wool.
Senator 01MAI IONEY. Do not disarm me.
Mr. Emiorr, There was a case manifestly where something local supervened over national interest.
Senator O'MAnoNEY. There are occasions, may I say, when the President runs ahead of his party, and I have known other occasions when the Congress has run ahead of the candidate for President.
Mr. Er.morr. That is true.
Senator O'MAIIONEY. There have been some such cases.
Mr. Ei.t.nyrr. That is all I am saying, that in a sense there is a slightly different mandate on a nationwide basis, and it. seems to me that that should be borne in mind when you consider this, but I am sure, sir,`this question will be debated with all your vigor and usual persuasiveness on the floor of the Senate.
Senator KEFAINER. I do want to again express our very deep appreciation to you, Dr. Elliott. You have made an outstanding contribution to this subject. We thank you, Senator O'Mahoney, for leading off with your excellent statement.
Senator (MAHONEY. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
(Whereupon, at 4: 30 p. m., the subcommittee adjourned.)
PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY
TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 11, 1958
UNITED STATES SENATE,
SUBCOMMITTEE ON CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENTS,
OF THE COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY,
Wagtington, D. O.
The subcommittee met) pursuant to recess, at 10: 15 p: in., in room 424, Senate Office Building, Hon. Estes Kefauver (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Senator Kefauver.
Also present: Senator Joseph S. Clark of Pennsylvania; Wayne H. Smithey, member, professional staff.
Senator ICEFAUVER. The committee will come to order. Our first witness this morning is Judge Musmanno, distinguished member of the Pennsylvania Supreme Court.
We are delighted to have Senator Clark from Pennsylvania, who is here to introduce and present Judge Musmanno. We will be glad to have any words from you Senator Clark.
Senator CLARK. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much for your courtesy in permitting me to appear before your subcommittee this morning to introduce formally to you a gentleman whom I am sure you have heard many things about. That is the distinguished Justice of the Supreme Court of Pennsylvania, Michael A. Musmanno.
Judge Musmanno has had a long, active, full, and varied career. He first, I imagine, came into national prominence many years ago when he was counsel for the defense at the Zacco-Vanzetti trial in Boston, endeavoring to protect the civil rights and civil liberties of those two unfortunates.
Since then he has had a distinguished career at the bar and in the Navy during World War II.
He has been serving with distinction on the Supreme Court of Pennsylvania for the last several years where his industrious research and his keen interest in the liberalization of the law of our Commonwealth has made its mark.
With respect to the subject matter before your committee, the question of legislation or a constitutional amendment to provide for the case of Presidential disability, a matter which is of the keenest interest to the entire country, Justice Musmanno has given very grave and careful thought, brought to bear upon the fine powers of his active mind, and I have no doubt that the suggestions which he is prepared to make to your subcommittee will be a very real benefit in the solution of this most difficult problem, which I think all Americans must hope can be solved in a satisfactory manner at the earliest possible moment.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for your courtesy.
87
(18	PIIMDENTIAL INABILITY
Senator ICI:FAME% Thank you very much, Senator Clark. The fact that you would come here and speak so highly of Judge Musmanno is a great recommendation to him.
Of course; we know of your active participation in the judiciary of Pennsylvania for manyyears, Senator Clark.
We would be glad ifiyOu would sit With tab cbmmit tee this morning and join in any questioning that you care to.
Senator CLARK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I regret that I have another committee meeting, to which I must go, and I want to thank you again for permitting me to come here.
Mr. 1%1151mA:ix°. Thank you very much, Senator Clark.
Senator KsvAuvrn.' Judge Musmanno, Senator Clark and also Senator Edward Martin, Senator Clark's colleague from Pennsylvania, have both suggested that you would be able to enlighten the committee an this important problem. Senator Martin would also be here except that he is being given an examination by a Physician today,hip regular checkup. I to asked me to explain to you' that be was glad to 10i n with Senator Clark in presenting you to the committee and in feeling that
you would have a contribution to make. •	•	_ .	•
I read in the New York Times, Sunday, of 4 new book that you have written; Judge Musmanno, of your experiences as a laillYOF over a period of many many years. It sounds like .an interesting hook. I
think you are entitled to a plug for your book this morning.	•
Mr. Shnuir moro. I want to mire you it was entirely coincidental
,that that review appeared on the eve of my appearance here before
the committee.
Senator KmrArivEri. Very well, Mr. Justice Musmanno, will you
proceed!	..„
Yon have a prepared statement, The full statement will he'printed
thePhi	_ record so that. any of it you do not read, or if you want to sum-
marize, the entire statement will appear as presented.
STATEMENT OV. PENNSYLVANIA SUPEEME COURT /MICE
MICHAEL A. MIISMANNO
Mr; MU8SIANNO. I shall be pleased if you care to put any questions,
_as I. proceed with my exposition of what Lregard to he a workable
plan to solve the problem which has plagued our  country for 168 years,
•	as to what should be done in the event of a Presidential diSability. Mr. Chairman, every 4 years the people 'of the United States elect a President...and a Vice President.' The Vice, President 'mnst answer to precisely the same qualifications required .Of the President,. But once the Vice President takes office, he beCirines stranger to the President's office, for which he is fully qualified, while the back of the 'man who is. President sags under the weight of the burdens in-creasinglypiled npOn it.
No one with the meagerest cognizance of public affairs can fail to .perceive that it is physically impossible for any one man to discharge all the duties which now devolve upon the President of the United States in response to the dictates of the Constitution and because of theimperions demands of daily recurring national CO*.
Since the Government must, of course, continue to function,'	re-
gardless of limitations of flesh and bone, the President is compelled to turn to some one or more other persons to discharge executive pow-
PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY	69
ors and duties, lest Government collapse. Thus, the President, depends on an assistant to the President, sometimes referred to as the "Assistant President," an office which does not, exist in the Constitution.
It may fairly be assumed, without intending any disrespect that, in loyally and conscientiously assisting the President, the "Assistant President" does some things which constitutionally must be done by the President himself.
I make no observation on how he does these things. He probably does them well, but he has no authority to do them at all. Not only does he have no authority to exercise Presidential power but the people have never passed on his qualifications to do what the President alone is supposed to do.
In the meantime a man who possesses the constitutional and occupational fitness to be President, which fitness has been considered and approved by the people, stands by idly and impotently. Is it not the acme of absurdity that the Vice President, with all his proved capacity to assist the President, must employ all his time as a timekeeper of debates in a legislative body of which he is not a member and where he can neither speak nor vote---except in a tie, a ratify so
exceptional as practically to be.	nonexistent? And is it not even
more absurd that when that legislative body adjourns, the Vice President has no duties at all, except to keep healthy so as to take over in the event the President dies or resigns, the latter of which no President line ever done yet 
In no other sphere of activity—military, civil, commercial, industrial, or fraternal is a substitute chief officer held in idleness until the moment he is to become chief himself,
The vice commander of an army, division, or regiment has duties which are indispensable to the success of the military enterprise.
Ile renders continuous and unceasing assistance to his superior
.
and is so intimately associated with what his chief doing that in the event of an emergency he assumes command without; a-13reak in the continuity of operation.
The executive officer of a ship has duties of an extremely important character, aside from taking over the command of the vessel in the event the command devolves upon him.
The vice president of an industrial corporation is not,kept'hidden away from the office end flee "plantsof the company until he is summoned to head the business' of which he has been kept in complete ignorance. He works by the side of the president:Of the railroad or steel company or the automobile firm at all times, and he is qualified at every and any moment to undertake with up-to-date competence, the responsibilities of the president, should it become necessary to do so.
President Eisenhower is the only President .who, 'While not utilizing the capacities of the Vice President to discharge Presidential functions (since he may net do so constitutionally), has at least allowed the Vice President to be kept minutely and intimately informed on the problenes confronting the White House, and 'therefore, 'the people of the United States. It is nothing short of shocking to learn from former President. Triiinan's memoirs that before he became President he was denied even the slightest knowledge on the atom bomb. It was not until the day after he had been sworn in as President and had had his first Cabinet Meeting that he learned'of the
70	PRESIDENTIAL. INABILITY
most destructive weapon in the world and learned further that ho was the person who was to decide if and when to use it.
Under the constitutional nmendment which I offer, Congress will supply the machinery to determine whether the President nt any given Moment is physically capable of standing on the bridge and giving the orders which will carry the vessel of the well7being of the American people through the storm which may threaten our security and even snryival.
If, because of illness, the PreSident lacks the strength and keenness of perception needed to guide the ship through heavy seas and foul weather, a Suitable hmmuSsion will so declare', and direct the. Vice President to take the helm.
We could be confronted with such a situation tomorrow, a year, or a decade ,from now. And no one realizes that possibility more titan President Eisenhower. He has expressedhimself emphatically on the subject..
SeVeral plans •have already been discussed in this connection, but I inn constrained to say,' with all respect and' courtesy to the authors of the various plans, that in my opinion they are not feasible either because they lack working practicability or because' they encounter cOnstitiltional barriers..,
1:11118, on© plan recommends that the President's Cabinet decide If and when the President. should resign if disabled. Since the Cabinet is made up entirely of Presidential appointees, one cannot dismiss the thought that their judgment and decision could well be influenced by personal .cOnsiderat ions.
Another plan proposes that Congress enact legislation which would permit the Agee President himself to decide When he should assume the President's office.
This plan, I respectfully submit, is unworthy of consideration. No person should have it in hiS own exclusive power to elevate himself to a higher office in a representative republic.
A Vice President who would crown himself in such it fashion would quickly find the crown tarnishing under the people's appraisement of an act which could be interpreted as selfish, egotistic, and unworthily ambitious.
Moreover, there have not been lacking examples in our history where the President and Vice President were of divergent political views even though belonging to the same political party, and there have been painful occasions where the Chief Executive and the Vico President were personally hostile to each other.
One suggested bill provides that a commission representing the executive, legislative, and judicial branches of the Government determine Presidential inability.
Senator KEFAINEB. What bill is that we are talking about here?
Mr. Nftisumsirio. Mr. Chairman, I did not endeavor to particularize the individual bills because I did not want to be seemingly criticizing the wisdom of any particular Congressman or Senator, but I have read all the bills on the subject which I have been able to obtain, and from all of them I have gathered what the various plans arel and 'I am indicating that none of those plans in my respectful opinion meets the needs of the situation.
Senator ICEPAIIVEB. Yes. Very well, Judge, I understand. There are several bills which would bring in the legislative, executive, and
PR ESIDENTIAL INABILITX	71
judicial branches and I did not know if you had reference to any particular one or not, but you have satisfactorily explained your attitude.
MiTsNiAxxo. Very well.
(Discussion off the record.)
Senator Ktwimuvrn, All right, sir, will you proceed ?
Mr. MITSMANNO. With regard to the suggestion that the chairman just made, might I respectfully interpolate here that the ratification of n constitutional umembnent does not take as long as is generally supposed. David Lawrence, in an article which he wrote recently on this subject, reminded us that. the 21st amendment repealing the 18th amendment was ratified in 10 months after submission.
The 17th amendment, providing for the popular election of Senators was ratified in 13 months.
The 19th amendment, which of course ns we know granted women suffrage, was ratified in 14 months., and the 20th amendment was ratified. 11 months following submission. by , Congress..
I really believe, Mr. Chairman, and I am sanguine in this hope, that if Congress would adopt a constitutional amendment on this subject quickly, that we could still have a ratification of the amendment by the end of this year.
Before our brief discussion on constitutional amendments, I, was referring to the bill which provides for a commission representing the executive, legislative, and judicial branches of the Government..
While the pion involved in that proposed legislation might _meet constitutional requirements it still would not satisfy, because two-thirds of the Commission would be made up of perso»s not elected by the people and, to that. extent, the plan. would deny the people an authoritative voice in the selection of their President.
Another serious objection to this indicated plan is that since the Supreme Court might be called upon to evaluate its constitutionality, the Chief Justice and the senior Associate•Justice who are declared to be members of that proposed Commission would be disqualified from considering the case, thereby depriving the country of a full judicial review at the time it. would be most needed.
The Chief Justice of the United States has already informed Congress that the entire membership of the Supreme Court is opposed to such a plan. Of course, the Court's wishes should be respected.
Still another plan declares that the President should voluntarily resign if disabled, and if he refuses to resign, impeachment proceedings could be initiated to compel him to do so.
This would be a most sorry solution of the problem. It..watdd make of a President's unfortunate illness the matter of a "state trial" with all the agonies which go with it, not, only to the principals involved, but to the Nation itself.
The only logical governmental body to decide Presidential inability is Congress which is responsible directly to time people.
Under the constitutional amendment I propose, Congress would, as I have stated, provide the machinery for determining .Presidential inability. I am sure that. Congress can and will work out a suitable plan to meet every contingency.
I personally would recommend that Congress enact. a law resolving the Judiciary Committees of the Senate and ITouse into a permanent
72	PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY
Presidential Inability Commission. The membership of such a Commission would be large enough and representative enough to speak for all parties, all geographical sections of the country, and all cur rent points of view.
At the same time, it would be small enough to meet and act quickly. The chairmen of the committees would be empowered to call a joint meeting of the committees at any time, whether Congress be or not be in session.
The chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee would preside over the Commission. This Commission, made up, as it would be, of persons elected by the people and commanding the respect of the entire country, would be entrusted with the delicate and grave task of determining whether a President, because of inability to discharge his powers and duties, should be displaced by the Vice President.
In the event the Commission found the President unable to attend to the responsibilities of the Presidential office, the Vice President would become President for the period of the President's disability.
When the President. would have recovered his health or in any way have overcome his inability to act, the Comtnission would restore him to office and the elevated Vice President would revert back to his original office.
A two-thirds vote of the Commission would be required to declare the President unable to diScharge the powers and duties of his office, and 'a similar vote would be needed to restore him to office, once the disability ceased.
Circumstances could combine to prevent the President- from fulfilling the duties Of his office for reasons other than ill-health. Now that our Presidents fly long distances over oceans, deserts, and mountains a President's plane could be lost, so that days, even weeks, could pass With no news as to Whether he had•survived.
A PreSident could conceivably beetune'eaptive of circumstances or hostile forces. These things could happen when momentous questions could be demanding immediate answers. In such situations where the President would 'be unable to perform his duties, even though presumably healthy, the Conimission would be empowered to direct. the Vice President to become President until the President's inability would hav'd been removed.
But even More important than the matter of succession to the Presidency is the need to ease the burdens of the President to the end that there will be less chance of his becoming physically incapacitated while in office. No President can possibly do all the things which the Constitution of 1787 requiresof him in the setting of 1958.
He cannot'Sign all the documents he is supposed to sign, he cannot read all the reports submitted to him to read, he cannot meet and talk to all the people which in the full discharge of his functions it would be expected he should meet. He cannot .candle all the details of recommendations for legislation, he cannot go into the minutiae of the entire Military Establishment; he cannot supervise the whole diplomatic corps. He cannot review all the criminal convictions under Federal statutes to determine whether he should exercise the Presidential pardoning power.
The President of 1958 must attendto matters which could not even have been imagined in George Washington's and John Adams' days.
PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY	73
The President of today is studying problems provoked by sputnik, lie must be schooled in missiles, satellites, and rockets, he must confer with scientists, he must consider a revamping of our educational system with emphasis on the science of survival.
He must study the globe and concern himself with what is hapkien-ing in all the European countries, in the Middle East, Far East, Africa, and wherever else the Soviet threat of world domination rears its python head to strike at our lifelines.
Ile must study the budget and the tax rate. He must worry over charts depicting trends in our national economy, he Must keep his linger on the pulse of NATO and our ever-growing number of alliances. He must preside over Cabinet meetings.
He must appoint judges and promote Army and Navy personnel. lie must consider foreign aid and reciprocal' trade agreements. He must ponder questions involving enforcement of court decrees and the possibility of calling out the National Guard in domestic turbulences.
As head of apolitical party he must meet with party leaders and map out political policy and program in various parts of the Nation.
Ever since Suez, scarcely a day has passed 'that some crisis has not snarled the President's desk. He must watch the United Nations on its ever-revolving carousel and international alinements and realine-ments.
There are national security meetings to attend and advise. There is royalty to receive anti entertain. He mist give news conferences where he is placed under cross-examination which requires him to answer questions and elucidate on every phase of our complex Government, complicated foreign affairs, and technological advances in aircraft, satellites, and•intercontinental missiles.
He must appear on television where he must be reassuring to a nation of eager people seeking light and guidance, and in preparing'for the performance he must keep in mind the triple role of a wise statesman, a spiritual counselor, and a charming actor. •
Senator KEFAUVER. Judge, that is one of the best descriptions of the duties of a President I have ever seen. It is very vividly given.
Mr. MusmAivxo; Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman
While the President is doing all these things, necessarily breaking many of the rules of good health in exerting himself beyond the suburbs of endurance, the Vice President stands br like a man at the edge of a frozen lake witiva rope in his hand' which he is forbidden to throw to the skater who has broken through the ice.
Under the plan I recommend; the Vice President not only throws the rope but he hastens to the rescue in a durable launch which will take aboard all Other national safeguards struggling inl the cold waters of indecision and delay.
If this 'constittuional amendment is -adopted. Congress • would: of course provide for ra!SeParate establishment for the Vice President. He would have his own staff and lie would have his•own mansion. Naturally he would no longer preside over the Senate where he is at present a robot who makes no decisions'and a metronome which controls no tempo or rhythm. I provide that the Senate shall elect its own president.RS well as president Oro tempore. The Vice President would thus dedicate all his time to the executive branch of the Government, to which he belongs and of which he is an inalienablbe integral part.
74	P1101+11)ENTIA INABILITY
Foreseeing possible criticisms that this plan might somehow reduce the supreme power of the President and his responsibility to the Nation,' let me say at once that while the Vice President, would work closely with the President, exercising such Presidential powers as are delegated to him, he would always be subordinate to the President. There is no possibility Whatsoever that by adding dignity and authority to the Vice President's office, this would effect a lessening of accountability in the Office of the Chief Executive.
National yesponsibility must always remain in ono person, the President, and by allowing him to decide which powers he will delegate for long or short periods, our Government will have, as it must have, executive leadership in a single man lie will be the leader of our Nation.
Ills task will always be the dedicated one of guiding the destinies of the American people ever toward the fulfillment of the ideals of the founders of our republic and the dreams, hopes, and aspirations of the American people.
In view of the fact that President Eisenhower has now suffered three serious illnesses while in the White Muse, it has been suggested that if he should again be incapacitated, he should resign and make Richard Nixon Acting President until such time as the President should feel he had fully recovered from his illness.
This plan was suggested at the time President Garfield lay prostrate from an assassin's bullet.
tlarfield's friends and supporters, however, refused to make the recommendation because they feared that once Chester Arthur assumed the President's office he would be installed permanently, and Garfield, if he should recover could never again regain office, except, of course, n a succeeding national election. The same situation prevailed during the period of President Wilson's illness.
. As of the present moment the President 'could not even constitutionally delegate his power to sign important documents in the event some accident, disabled his writing hand. When President Eisenhower underwent surgery at the Walter Reed Hospital for ileitis, he was under anesthesia, according to a signed article in the  Washington Post February 2, for 1 hours. It, is frightening to contemplate that if during this period the' United States had suffered an atomic or missile attack, there would have been no Commander in Chief to coordinate defense, counterattack, and civilian evacuation. lie did ready United States defense forces for emergency before taking the anesthesia.
In these days that large areas of the country could be wiped off the face of the earth in a matter of hours, even minutes, it is not necessary to point out how vital it is that we have at all times a Commander in Chief ready to respond to any emergency.
Under the plan I recommend, the President, before enteringthe hospital would only need to delegate his full powers to the Vice President for the period of the operation, and the whole country could be assured that in the event of an attack, we would not find our great engine of defense 'immobilized because of .the lack  of an engineer
to pull the levers.	.
Where the Vice President becomes President. because of the death, resignation, or removal of the President, or where the President's .
PitFAIDF'NT1AI, INAAIZITY	75
illness is ascertained to be one which will endure for some 6 months or more, the Vice President, who will have become President, will himself need assistance, even as the President needed it.
It must be kept in mind that in three instances the Vico President succeeded to the Presidency only 1 month after the President had begun his term of office.
President, Tyler served 3 years and 11 months of Harrison's term; Andrew Johnson served 3 years and 11 months of Lincoln's term; Harry Trinnan,served 3 years and 11 months of Franklin I). Roosevelt's fourth term.
In the other four cases whore Vice Presidents became President, their incumbencies were not, of short duration. Chester A. Arthur served out 3 years and 0 months of Oarfield's term; Theodore Roosevelt served out 3 years and 0 months of McKinley's second term. Fillmore aml Coolidge served, respectively, 2 years and 8 months and 2 years and 7 months of their predecessors' terms.
So much, Mr. Chairman, did these Vice Presidents in some instances believe that they were serving out their own terms of the Presidential office that in the cases of Theodore Roosevelt, and Calvin Coolidge, they bOth declared that the first, terms which they served, because ofi accession to the Presidency, constituted the first term of an enumeration of first and second terms in order to determine whether they should be a candidate for a third term.
Because of the possibility, as exemplified by the above historical facts, that a Vice President may become President for practically the entire term of the deceased or removed President, I have introduced in my plan something entirely new in our governmental scheme.
If, for the purpose of conserving the President's health and allowing him to concentrate on the immediate momentous problems of his Office, he needs a Vice President who will take over some of the burdens of the President's Office, it naturally follows that when the Vice President assumes the office of the President in his own name, he will need, as the President needed, a Vice President to assist him. I have thus provided that when the Vice President becomes President, Congress shall elect a Second Vice President who shall perform all the powers and duties of the Vice President during the time the Vice President holds the office of President.
The Second Vice President will be chosen from not less than three persons qualified under the Constitution for the Presidency and recommended by the national committee of the political party of which the President is a member.
If the Vice President assumes the office of President only temporarily and the President resumes his office, the original Vice President reverts back to his Vice President's status and the office of the specially chosen Second Vice President, if it has been created, shall cease to exist.
Congress will undoubtedly provide for other features in the implementation of this constitutional amendment.
We can entertain the hope that even after setting up machinery for Presidential succession based on a President's inability to perform his duties, the Nation will never have to witness a transfer of the President's office in the midocean of crises, domestic or foreign.
But, so long es human flesh remains something less formidable than stone and steel; tliis possibility always hovers within the realm of po-
76	PftmrDENTIAL INABILITY
tential reality and the time to take aboard an additional pilot is not when the ship is headed for annihilating rocks, but before the perilous passage is begun.
In any event, there can be no question that the President's burdens have pyramided until no human Atlas can carry them without hazarding Ins health and the welfare of the Nation. In these crucial days, and more crucial days to come, we can take no chance on a Presidential stumble which could conceivably send our well-being, security, and even survival over the abyss of complete ruin.
We do not need, nor do we want, in the White House, a Hercules of muscles and brawn, but we do want and can have a President who will exercise at all times the genius of leadership, the courage of initiative: and the dynamic drive of concentrated effort, but we must supply him with nn armored knight who will hold off and strike down the ever-pressing foes of distraction, detail, and delay, while the President leads us on to ever greater heights of peace, security, prosperity, and human happiness.
Senator KEFAUVER. Judge Musmanno, you have presented a very thoughtful And challenging statement, and one containing not only a suggested solution to the immediate problem that we are con-sidering,defining the inability and the removal of the inability of the President, but several other problems with which many of us have been interested and concerned for a long, long time, and which have been discussed by students of the Constitution and political scientists throughout the years.
It is quite apparent that you have given this matter a great deal of careful thought. We appreciate your preparation of this paper and your appearance here.
Now if you will, sir, let us read your proposed amendment section by section and perhaps we can discuss it as we go along.
Mr. MusmANNo. Yes, Mr. Chairman.
SECTION' 1. The executive power shall be vested In a President of the United States of America who may delegate, in writing, such powers and duties as in his discretion he shall deem appropriate, to the Vice President whose exercise of such delegated powers and duties shall have the same legal effect as If perforated by the President.
Senator KEFAUVER. Now sir, I suppose that that would apply especially to A President. who is going out of the country or who may be undergoing an operation or who, in the normal course of things, would want. to delegate certain responsibilities and powers to the Vice President.
It would not apply to delegations during a period 'of inability, is that. correct /
Mr, MtismAxxo. That is true, Mr. Chairman. This is a voluntary act on the part of the President to relieve himself of an onerous duty or chore when more pressing problems are demanding his undivided attention.
Senator KEFAUVER. And the power to delegate would automatically carry with it the pbWer to take back?
Mr. MUMANNO. That is true.
He could delegate a particular responsibility, he could delegate the powers of a particular departMent indefinitely or he could delegate certain powers or all his powers for a certain limited period of time
PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY	77
indicated in the docoment of delegation, and ho may also, after having
delegated powers unconditionally and indefinitely later recall those
powers by another writing.
Senator KEVAUVEH. Very well, I think that is clear.
Now lot's go on to section 2.
Mr. MUSMANNO (reading) :
Sr:c. 2. In case of the removal of the President front face, or of his death, resignation, or Inability to discharge the powers and duties of the office of President, the Vice President shall become President.
Mr. Chairman,. you may note there that I have altered slightly the language of the Constitution which states in that. respect (article Ii, section I, paragraph 6) :
in case of the removal of the President from (Mice or of his death, resignation, or Inability to discharge the powers and duties of the said office, the same shall devolve an the Vice President.
Constitutional authorities have argued at, great length and for a long time on whether this provision of the Constitution means that the-Vice President shall discharge the powers and duties of the office and therefore only become, in a manner of speaking, an Acting President, or whether he takes over the office completely.
The first time that this question came before the country was when Harrison died. A large body of opinion at that time was to the effect that Tyler would succeed only to the powers and duties, he would be only an Acting President, and would not become President. Tyler apparently was of that belief himself, because when he first took the oath; he referred to himself as Acting President, but 2 days later he seems to have reconsidered his position and he then declared himself President. of the United States. And all other Vice Presidents who have since become President because of the death of their predecessors hove followed that precedent. But there still remains some doubt as to whether because of the construction of that long paragraph there may net be the interpretation that the Vice President only succeeds to the authority to discharge the powers and duties of the Presidential office rather than to the office itself.
I have endeavored to remove all ambiguity by'saying that. the Vice President, in the event of the death, resignation, or inability to dis-
charge the powers and duties of the ffice, shall become	President and
actually be the President.
Senator KvrAuvEn.' Judge Musmanno, I follow your logic and agree with it as to the first two contingencies, that is the death or resignation, but I wonder if where you make the Vice President. the President in Case of inability, whether you are not getting into trouble in the event that inability is removed.
Mr. 'Mus3tA Ns°. I do not belie-' s I am, Mr. Chairman, and I anticipated that nossible obserVation.
I use throughout my exposition and in this proposed amendment. the phraseology that, the Vice President shall become President. during that period he is actually holding tlie Presidential office. I do not have hiM an acting President, or a temporary President. -
I do not think that when the Vice President. actually is exerting the powers of the President that there should be any linlitation on 'his powers, especially if lie is representing us overseas or is dealing with other nations should there be the thought that somehow or other
22324-58--6
78	Pltppsrl}NrIAL INABILITY
hia fictions ore not. final and they still need the approval of the Presi-(kilt. 1 beliovo tint. during the time the Vivo President occupies the Presidential chair, whether it be for the remainder of the term of a dead Pivsident or whether it be only for the mutter of 6 weeks while the President is undergoing on operation and convalescence, the Vim! President. should be actually the President.
Of course, Mr. Chairman, this entire constitutional amendment is miitary. It. must. be considered in all its various integral parts. We are not to be restricted to one particular paragraph in determining just what is the 8pecitic purpose of duet delegation of power, and I think that by the Hine we get to the end of the reading of this whole proposed nmentlinent, it. will become piite clear that them shall be no question about the right, of a disabled President. to recover his dice once his inability has been removed.
Senator KmurvEit. All right, sir, then read the next paragraph of section 2.
Mr. MUSMANNO. Yes.
When the Vice President. thereupon becomes President for an interval in excess of 6 months, Congress shall determine whether or not a Second Vice President shall be elected to perform all the powers and duties of the Vice President for the period the Vice President shall be President.
Obviously, if the Vice President. becomes President, only for a matter of days or weeks, we would not want, to create the oflice of Second Vice President.
The Second Vice President shall be elected by Congress from not less than three persons duly qualified tinder the Constitution and recommended for election by the national committee of the political party of wide!' the President, is a member.
Senator KEFAuvEn. Judge, in the election of the new Vice President or the Second Vice President by the Congress, T know it is not well in a proposed constitutional amendment to develop or to set forth details, but how did you have in mind Congress electing a Second Vice President, that is by joint semion or in what manner?
Mr. MIT831A.xxo. I had in mind, Mr. Chairman,.the action of Con-gm.; as Congress acts generally, by a majority vote of both Houses, just as any bill would be enacted. And in view of the fact that the possible candidate for such an office could only come from the party of which the President is himself a member, it could not, happen that because the majority of Congress would be of sporty opposite to that of which the President is a member, that the Vice President would then be of a party opposite to the party of which the President. is n member.
Senator KEVAUVER. Would you have in mind the Senate acting on it separately from the House or would you have in mind a joint session with everybody having one vote.
Mr. Muslim: so. I had not worked out that detail. I would at first blush assume that each House would vote separately just as legislation is voted on. I do uot know that the House, and Senate ever join in one joint session for the purpose of enacting legislation.
However, in working out, the machinery, whatever might seem wise would of course still come within the framework of this amendment as I have now drafted it.
PlIFSIDF,NTIAT, INABILITY	79
Saint or Kvxm;vim. Your language there would, in your opinion, be interpreted then to mean in such manner as the Congress may decide?
Mr. MUSMANNO. Yes, that is correct, and I do have a provision at the end of the amendment to that effect.
Senator KryAvvr,u. All riht, sir, let's go to section 3.
Mr. MUSMANNO (rending):
Sre. 3. in the event the President Is unable to discharge the powers end duties of the office of President for any reason, the Vice President shall become Pres!• dent and continue In said office until the President whom he has replaced Is able to perform the powers and duties of President. .
Thereupon, the Vice President shall resume the powers and duties of the office of Vice President and the office of Second N'Ice President shall cease to exist.
I think that, thin language would carry with it the modification of what might seem to be didactic language in the first paragraph of section 2, that the Vice President actually becomes the President during inability of the President. And then you will notice that I add here specifically :
Congress shall by legislation provide the manner of determining the inability of the President, for any reason, to discharge the powers am? ditties of the dice of President and when such inability has ended.
In my. exposition, I have recommended a Presidential Inability Commission made up of the House and Senate Judiciary Committees. The Congress might desire to adopt some other method in which to irsolve this problem, and of course it would have that complete authority under this amendment, as now drafted.
Senator KRFAUVER. I would like to ask you a question or two about section 3, but let's go back to section 2 for just a minute.
I know that in determining to have the Second Vice President elected by the Congress as a whole, either by each House acting separately or by a joint session, which is unknown in the working of Congress today, as you have pointed out, that you gave consideration to the election under the constitutional provision of having an election thrown into the House where each State has one vote, as in the case where no candidate for President has a majority of the electoral college.
Why did you not think that plan more feasible?
Mr. NfURINIANNO. I thought this plan would be more feasible because it would be less cumbersome. It would be a vote of the membership of Congress rather than a vote by States, and it would provide for a greater and more responsible representative vote because I include the Senate in the deliberation of ,the determination of a Second Vice President, whereas in the election of a President, the choice is left to the House of Representatives alone.
Senate'. KEPAIIVER. It would be more representative and more democratic.
Mr. Musmamso. And more democratic, yes.
Senator KEFAUVER. Sir, in the—
Mr. MusiraNso. Allow me to interrupt just there, Mr. Chairman. Senator KEFAUVER. Yes.
Mr. Musaraxso. When the Constitution was drafted and adopted, Senators were elected hy the legislatures. Now of course they are elected :by the people. We have amore democratic choice and, therefore, I thought as yOn have indicated, it. would be a more democratic way of proceeding to elect a Second Vice President.
80	PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY
Senator ICEpativan. One of my good friends of the press has pointed out hero that when the Constitution was originally written and for a number of years thereafter political parties in the sense we have them now were not envisioned, and your section 2, the second part of it, is based upon the theory that political parties will continue to be a part of our political system.
Mr. MusmANNO. Yes, I do. When the Constitution was written and adopted, there seemed to be a feeling that George Washington would live forever, and that there would be a unanimity of political thought on how a Republic should run, but we found immediately after President Washington's retirement that there was not that unanimity.
In fact, John Adams' Vice President was not of the seine party as John Adams himself, and now our system, 
our American system, our
American party system, think represents
the very core of democratic idealism, because we have constant opposition to the party in power. We thus have a system of checks and balances which at all times calls to account what is being done by the party in power.
So while it is not written into the Constitution, I believe that our party system is as much a part of our governmental scheme as the division of our Government into three departments.
Senator ICErauvv.a. This would of course be the first time that political parties were mentioned in the Constitution.
Mr. MUSNIA N NO. Yes; that is true, Mr. Chairman.
There are many features of our Government today which we accept without question but which are not mentioned in the Constitution.
For instance, the Constitution makes no reference to the Cabinet at all, aml yet we now accept the President's Cabinet as practically part of the White House.
Senator ICEr.turEa. Except that nobody knows exactly who the Cabinet is.
I mean we think of the Cabinet technically as the heads'Of executive departments, and yet we find the Ambasiador to the United Nations, the head of the Bureau of the Budget and several other people being brought in and classified as Cabinet members very often when actually they are not heads of executive departments.
Mr. Mvs.m.mvo. Yes; that is truck There is no crystalWation into definite and precise language statutorily or otherwise as 'to What the Cabinet is.
Senator KEFAVVER. Then, sir, it is well to assume that. political parties get together on matters without delay and with unanimity; but we all know of some cases where that has happened only .after a great
deal of agitation.	•
What if the political party representing the President's party, the national committee, just couldn't decide?
Mr. Musataxxo. I do not think there would be a dearth of candi-
i4	dates, nor would there be any trouble in selecting three of them.
The big problem might be how to select 3 out 33.
Senator KEFAlLTVER. Yes.
Mr. MtramANNo. And since it'wou1dalways.be by a vote Of the com-
mittee, it ,would be quite fantastical to assume that.there'coUld'net be
a majority vote on at least. three out Of the many 'candidates that could
be presented.
PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY	81
Senator KEFAUVER. I was not talking about in the Congress after it got there.
Mr. MVSIJANNO. Yea.
Senator KEFAUYER. I was thinking about in the committee itself.
Mr. blusatazoto. Yes I refer to the national committee as such.
Senator KEFAUVER. All right, sir. Now in connection with section 8, you would leave the machinery for establishing the Committee, which would decide upon the inability and the removal of the inability of the President, to Congress to decide?
Mr. MU$MANNO. Yes.
That, machinery would naturally include a procedure. There would be an ascertainment of the President's condition in the event he was ill.
Certainly there would be peihaps even a smaller Committee appointed by the Chair of the Commission to select doctors and experts to pass upon or to examine and report to the Commission on the President's condition.
There would be many details which I am positive Congress would work out satisfactorily.
Senator KEFAUVER. This would enable Congress, to through legislation, decide that it, itself, the Congress, should decide, or it could decide upon a Commission, part from the Congress, part from the executive branch, or could decide upon a Commission wholly of either, or it could decide upon a Commission as you have suggested, made up_ of the Judiciary Committees.
Mr. 3IU8MANNO. Yes.,
Senator KEFAUVER. Of the House and the Senate.
Mr. 5ItTsmsigNo. Yes. When I first approached this problem, I actually had Congress deciding the question of inability. I had drafted that in very specific language. But then I thought that there might be difficulties in the event Congress was not in session.
Some time would be required to bring Congress to Washington and time might be of the essence. So therefore—
Senator Kmativria.. Filibusters, delays.
Mr. MusmaNNo. That is true. It is all possible. So I thought there should be‘a permanent body, and I feel that the two Judiciary ComMitteeS would fulfill all the requirements of any emergency.
Senator KRFAUYER. I know the Judiciary Committees will be flat-. tered with the confidence that you have expressed in them, Judge Mustrianno;,
Mr. MUSMANNO. Yes; I do have that confidence implicitly and coin-.
pletely.	.	.
Senator KEFAUVER. All right, sir; suppose we go on now to sections 4 and 5.
Mr. MUSMANNO. Section 4. The Vice President shall not. be President of the Senate or preside over that body as heretofore...
I do not think that any great constitutional authority has ever ascribed to that feature of out .Constitution any considerable merit; namely, that one of the Vice President presiding over the Senate. 1 think that featUre was included only to provide the Vice President with some employment while she stood by ready to take Over the Presidency in the event Of a President's death.
In many ways the Vice President was regarded as a rather super-fluouS in the early dayS of otir Republic, and even in the drafting'of
82	PitiADENTIAL 1NAD1iITY
the C011 Kt it 111 (OW In one of the debates on the subject, us to how the President should be addressed?,soineone said that he should be referred to as "Your High Mightiness. That of course was regarded by most of the members of the convention as !wing perfectly absurd. They finally agreed upon "Your Excelleney," and then someone suggeste4 that the Vice President. should be addressed as "Your Superfluous Excellency."
Senator KIWAIIVElli I believe in the first, draft of the Constitution tliere wasn't Lilly Vice President.
11Ii.smAxxo. In the original first draft, that is true.
Senator KErAtiven. In the original lirstdraft.
Mr. MrsmAxso. That is true; yes. •
Senator IcErAuvEn. And they decided upon one and they had to have something for him to do.
Mr, ANSHAN NO. 'Flint was it.
Senator KermivEn. Who Was it that said that the main job of the Vice President was to wake up in the morning and inquire about the health of the President-
Mr. MesmAxxo. 1 remember in that rather successful musical comedy, "Of Thee 1 Sing," there was the usual smoke-tilled maul of minus politicians selecting a candidate for the. Vice Presidency, and finally a Man was called in mid the spokoman for the committee that was considering vice presidential candidates, speaking for the committee, said to this man who NVO.F1 called hi—df think they called him Winterbottom or some such ludicrous name—he said to him, "We placed all the names of potential rico presidential nominees in a hat, and unfortunately yours was drawn."
Senator KIIPAUVER. 011 the more serious side, T think it should be said, though, that, particularly beginning with President. Truman, important assignments had been given to our Vice Presidents.
Upon the suggestion of President. Truman, Congress enacted a lawmaking the Vice President a member of the Security Council end Vice President Barkley was given many*responsible duties.
As you pointed out, this has been enlarged upon by Mr. Eisenhower. Mr. NIcT8M-ANNO. Yes.
Senator Kr.FAUVER. In regard to Vico President. Nixon ?
Mr. MvsNtAxso. Well, I do think that the'diee of the Vice President, now and for several decades, despite all the raillery which you can Lind in plays and cartoons, lies achieved dignified stature, and under this proposed amendment, of mine of course it will be almost on the level with presidential dignity.
Senator ICKFAVVEn. All right, sir, now let's consider section 6. Mr. Mus3rAxso (reading) :
See. 5. The President of the Senate shall be chosen by the Senate from their body and he will not, because of such presidency be relieved of any of his duties or deprived of any of his authority as Senator. When participating In debate, he will relinquish the chair to the President pro temper° who will also be chosen by the Senate front their body. The President may, at his pleasure, authorize any Member of the Senate temporarily to preside In his stead.
Senator KEFAINER. Then the President of the Senate would be just
about, the same as the Speaker of the House?
Mr. Mus3rAsNo. That is it exactly, Mr. Chairman.
Senator KEFAUVER. All right, sir.
Mr. MCSMANNO. Then the other two sections are really formal.
(Reading:]
PHESIDEINTJAI, INABIbITY	83
Un,. 0, Congress 811011 have lamer to enforce this article by appropriate 1(1(1'41[11ton.
NEC. 7. '1hiN alibi° shun be inoperative unless It Omit have been rall(led as an nmenament to Hai Constitntlon by the iegtslattiren of the moveral Stator, na provided to the Conktttullon, within 7 years from the dote of the 8ebtelg-14 Ion thereof to the Mates by the Offlgroot.
UKO, H. Thla article Hindi take effect immediately after rntlfleatton by the requisite number of Hinter otter anbinbosion thereof.
I thought that that wuli /1111)011 ant. because if tta need—and of course we do need—some amist anvil in the discharge of the powers and duties of the President, that the incumbent. President should have the benefit of that assistance immediately or as soon as it can be gotten to him.
Senator KiwAtivEn. Mr. Smilliey, do you have any questions?
Mr. Smithey is our very Oda counsel.
Mr, SMITHEY. JudFe, 11 would like to ask you a couple of questions. Mr. 111118MA N NO. a es, Mr. Smithey.
Mr, Smirimv. First of all, under the provisions of the present, Constitution, ou whom do you think the decision falls to determine the inability of the President
Mr. MusAimitio. At the present time the Constitution does not, indicate on whom the decision should fall.
Obviously if the President is able to determine himself, he would decide, because ho merely makes a statement, "I am unable to discharge the powers and duties of my office," and the Vice President,
would then net ns PMidellt. lint Ike big problem, Mr. Smithey, is
that if he should do that, if the President should voluntarily allow
the Vice President to take over the powers and duties of the President's office, what, would happen when the President, would have recovered from his illness, or would have removed his inability? And it is because of that troublesome problem that Chester Arthur never took over the duties of the President during Garfield's incapacity, which lasted 80 days.
During those 80 days Garfield performed only. one presidential act, and that was to sign a bill or rather a paper having to do with extradition. There was always the fear on the part of Garlield's friends and supporters that, if Arthur took over the presidency, that Garfield could never become President. again.
Mr. SMITIIEY. If the President is incapacitated and unable therefore to make the decision himself, do you feel that under the present
provisions of the Constitution it is incumbent upon the Vice President to make that decision?
Mr. MU8MANNO. I do not. I would look upon that as being very unfortunate.
Senator KEFAUVER. In line with that question, suppose the President were obviously incapacitated, unable to carry on, and was not even able to write a letter asking the Vice President to take over. I thought most. constitutional lawyers had felt that in that circumstance the Vice President would have the power to take over the duties, and
public opinion would be the judge as to whether lie had done the right thing or not.
Mr. Musmasam. That is true, but just as soon as that would happen, you would have litigation.
Once the Vice President would take over the office of the President and made Executive orders, all those who would be adversely affected
84	PIDISIDENTT1Ab MAMMY
to an appreciable degree would question the power of the Vico President to be President.
Individuals who might be discharged from office or who might be demoted would question the right of the Vice President to act as President.
But there is a greater problem, a greater worry than those which I have just indicated.
Of course, this does not at all apply to the present incumbent of the Presidential chair or any who might in the foreseeable future have the honor of sitting. in that exalted position. But we do know that when President Wilson was incapacitated, as ho was for 18 months, it was assumed that he was incapable of performing the duties of the President, and there were overtures made upon Vice President Tom Marshall to take over the Presidency. But lienever did, for the simple reason that he assumed that his assumption of the office would be questioned by the President. himself, because while President Wilson was physically incapacitated, and to a certain extent paralyzed, ho was mentally alert, mid with that alertness he still had the tremendous power of the Presiamcy within his grasp.
Ire had his friends, his supporters, who woula rally to his cause and might well contest, and would undoubtedly have contested the Vice President taking over the Presidency.
Dr. Grayson, who was the President's physician, said ho would never sign a certificate of disability.
In fact, President. Wilson resented very much that there were even Cabinet, meetings during that. time. Secretary of State Lansing called the Cabinet together on a number of occasions, and when Wilson was able to exert. himself articulately, one of his first acts was to dismiss Lansing for having done what he thought Lansing had no right• to
do.	Thus you have that. problems and it is an immediate problem.
What. I think should be done is that. this amendment, this or one similar to it, by the machinery which I have indicated should be adopted at once as a constitutional amendment and submitted to the people. If the constitutional amendment. is adopted by Congress-- and of course as we know it can only be adopted by a two-third vote and then it goes to the legislatures if the amendment is adopted and any catastrophe should occur along the lines you have indicated, you at 'least would have the expression of two-thirds of the representatives of the people as being in favor of a commission to determine whether the President is able or not, able to perform the functions of his office.
Senator Kv.r,tuvEtt. All right, Mr. Smithey.
Mr. SMrFREY. In the correction of the ambiguity which exists in article II, section 1, clause 6, I take it from the fact that you submitted a proposed constitutional amendment, that you feel that any solution to the problem must come by way of constitutional amendment, and that a legislative enactment would be insufficient.
Mr. MrsArmixo. Categorically so.
Mr. Sammy. Thank you, sir.
That is all, Mr. Chairman.
Senator KEFAUVER. Judge Musmanno, we are certainly very grateful to you for this excellent presentation of your viewpoint and your discussion of this problem in such knowledgeable terms.
We thank you very much for coming here and being a witness with us today.
PUFASIDKNTIAL INABILITY	85
Mr. MtnotANNO. And I want• to thank you very much, Senator Ke-fauvor, for giving me this great privilege and opportunity to come here, and of having made it possible for me to come while I am still in Washington, after having just been released from the Naval Hospital in Bethesda.
I thank you very, very much.
Senator ICErAtivini. Now our next distinguished witness is Mr. Martin Taylor, chairman of the subcommittee on presidential inability of the New York State bar. Mr. Taylor has a long and distinguished record as an attorney end, as an attorney, has specialized on constitutional problems, lie is, and for a number of years has been, the senior member of the law firm of Reed, lloyt, Taylor, and Washburn of 52 Wall Street, New York City.
We appreciate very much your presence here today, Mr. Taylor.
STATEMENT OF MARTIN TAYLOR, CHAIRMAN, SUBCOMMITTEE ON
PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY, NEW YORK STATE BAR
Mr. TAYLOR. This problem was stated in a very short sentence in 1787 by only one delegate to the Constitutional Convention, Dickenson. Ile said, "What is inability?"
Senator ICErAuvza. Off the record.
((Discussion off the record.)
Mr. TAvLon. What Mr. Dickenson said was: "What is inability? Who raises the question and who determines it ?"
That was all the debate there was about it It. was not until 1850 that a man named Curtiss wrote a book on constitutional law, and ho repeated what Dickenson said, and wrote, "Nothing has been added toit."
The curious thing is that in flint intervening period both Marshall and Storey, who wrote considerably on the Constitution, never mentioned the subject.
Now we get to the present problem. I think most people are agreed that there is no necessity to define "inability." Whatever tribunal, whether created by statute or by constitutional amendment, should have the authority to determine inability, whatever the cause may be. You might have physical inability, temporary or permanent : you might have mental inability, temporary or permanent; absence from the country, capture by the enemy theoretically, and any other circumstance.
Whatever the tribunal is, it should make the determination. Second, you come to who should raise the question.
Senator ICEFAUVER. On that first point, I believe that that is the general thinking of most of the constitutional students who have spoken on this subject: that "inability" is a term that should be left as it is.
Mr. TAYLOR. There is more agreement on that than on any other phase of it.
Senator KEFAUYER. Yes.
Mr. TAYLOR. You come to the second point': Who raises the question ? That I think is again involved with the third one—Who determines it—because, whatever your method, whoever is given the power to determine, clearly might just as well have the power to raise the issue.
86	PIINRIDNIsnIAL tNAH1LITY
So we conic to the major problem: Who determines it That again divides itself into two sections.
Does it require a constitutional amendment or does the power exist in the Legislature!
Then you get to the last question: Whether it be determined by net of Congrem or by constitutional amendment ,-how should it be done?
Now, ns to the first qmstion, as to whet her it should be by constitutional amendment or lky statutory enactment, there is a great deal of divergence of view.
In the Presidential Succession  Act it was taken for granted that Congress had the dower to pass it. A. great ninny authorities, pro. fessom of constitutional law have eXpreASNI the view that the general douse at the end of section I of the Constitution, the broad comprehensive powers' section,. is sufficient to give Congress that power. There has been ninth said so that. it. has raised a sullieient vestion so that, whether you agree with one view or the other, I think the practical view to take of it is that there twist be a rOliStillIti011ril amendment in order to remove that doubt.
It may be as the gentleman who spoke before me said, the amendment is categorically necessary. We do not have to go as far as that. It is practical and necessary, whatever the fact may be about that.
Anil on that ground I think
.Senator Ksrm,vp:a. Now will you enlarge?
Mr. TArt.ort, I weeping to.
Senator ICEntryza. All right, sir.
W. TAYLOR, The suggestion was made by the former Attorney General some months ago that it should be done on the ground that the Vice President already has the power, and that he should have with him, in making the decision, the advice of certain members of the Cabinet.
The Attorney General's argument was that, instead of clothing the Vice President with the power, his proposed amendment simply Bin-ited his power by giving some power that he had and sharing it with the Cabinet.
That view I think is not sound.
It. certainly is not. sound in the sense that. we are interpreting the Constitution; because, at the time when this was written, the Vice President and the President were the people who got the most and the second greatest number of votes.
Very soon that crystallized into political parties.
It was not likely that it was contemplated that the candidate who had just. been defeated by possibly a narrow margin would suddenly say to the PreSident, "Well, I don't think you are able to perform the duties of your office." It has not been interpreted that way during all these years.
Certainly it was not contemplated that the Cabinet have anything to do with. it because the Cabinet did not exist.. It wasn't created until by statute in the early part of the 1800's, so that his proposal was not. an interpretation of the constitutional provision. It was a suggestion of a method of solving it now, which is, of course, different.
I go back for a moment now to the actual text, which recites in the
first three caccs	death, removal, resignation, and so forth.
PRESIDYNTIAL INATIIIATY	87
They obviously are self-determining and, therefore, there was' no problem of whether the Vice President succeeded to the duties or to the oflice, which has been the controversial thing, because obviously anyone who was impeached or died or resigned could not resume the office.
The practiee of swearing in the Vice President on the death of Presidents, which is the only one of those contingencies that has happenedAas heroine an nccepted practice, althoi!gli there is nothing in the Constitution at all about it, there is no provision for doing that. It has become custom.
My own view is that those first, three Ohio contemplated succession to the office, and that, the inabiliy clause contemplated accepting the responsibility of performing the duties of the office.
There are several reasons that point, to that. One is there are various State constitutions, oven colonial charters, where a comparable provision exists as to a lieutenant governor and the governor. I
The common case now, for example, s where a governor is out of a State, the lieutenant governor performs the duties of the governor in that period. That. I think was what was meant by it. I do not think it meant, anything more than that, that during inability the duties devolved.
That I realize is a controversial subject and much debated.
Now, as to the solution of it, assuming that it, requires a constitutional amendment, then you get to the problem which confronts you gentlemen : What should it be?
There have been all sort of proposalo. There has been the suggestion of the Cabinet, there has limn the suggestion of a special tribunal, there has been the suggestion that the Vice President substantially not only take the initiative but make the determination, the suggestion that, the President make the determination.
Obviously the President can.
I think there is no power, I think there is no interpretation that can be put on the Constitution language which indicates that it was expected to authorize the Vice President to assume the duties. I think It was deliberately omitted. The reason that I think that is because if you read the debates at that time, there were tremendous issues on which there were very strongly expressed views on both sides, and when Dickenson raised that, I think he had in the back of his mind, and some of the others had in the back of their minds, "Well, we will come to that later."
I think it simply never was done.
I do not think there' is an indication of how it should be done. It clearly is a matter of commonsense that if the President simply said, "I am unable to perform my duties," that would raise the question.
I should doubt whether the Vice President had any power to raise it, and certainly there is no indication who else could raise it.
So I think it has to be met.
I think at the moment there is no, way that you could, at least so far as the Constitution is concerned, no way you could say at a given moment such a person, could, through such an act, have the Vice Peesident, begin to function.
88	PRI.141 DENTIM, INAIMAITY
My suggestion is somewhat shorter than that of the gentleman who preceded me. I think it is too short, but it is the beginning of something that. could be amplified:
'the eananenrvittent and tertnInntlott of Inability ahall ho fletprmitwol by such atelboil as rongress shall hr law provide.
That omits any language as to whether oe not the dice or the duties are succeeded to. which is deliberately done because I think there would be no question about the fact that any net. of Congress could clearly cover that.
In making it. as general and brief as that, I had this in mind: As a broad principle of constitutional law, there should be expressed simply the enabling power: the basic chart to go by, and if sonic such thing as that is utilized, it. has the benefit that ro»grm could correct, over the years, the method which was adopted.
Senator KEr.wvEa. In other words, if One method was tried and some defect occurred?
Mr. TAYLOR. That is it.
Senator KErAvvEa. Then Congress would have In its power the power of correction without going through the constitutional amendment process.
Mr. TAvt,os. If you write into the Constitution the actual machinery, for example, if you permitted the Supreme Court judges you would have the problem, which is again a debated matter, as to whether a. Supreme Court judge should function in ,any capacity except as a judge. You would have the difficulty of- undoing constitutional amendments, let alone the difficulty of passing them, but if you give that. broad general power to Congress, you can change that.
Senator ICErAuvEa. Then on that score you and Judge Musmanno see eye to eye.
Mr. TArim. That is right.
Senator KErAuvEn. One of the alternative resolutions which I had tiled is Senate Joint Resolution 133, which has the same thing in mind of allowing Congress by legislation to determine inability and removal of inability. But. your language seems to he shorter and move to the point.
Will you read it. again, Mr. Taylor?
Mr. txyLoa (reading) :
The eommeneement and termination of Iii ability shall he deteratlaell Ity such method as Congress shall by law provide.
Now I used the words "such method" intending by that. that it should not be Congress as a whole, for the same reasons that Judge Musmanno pointed out, the difficulty of getting them together, perhaps too much debate, partisan feeling, and so on.
Senator KEFAUVER. 111 other words, you would interpret your language to not authorize Congress itself to=
Mr. TAYLOR. I said "by such method."
Senator ICErAuvEs. To make a determination.
Mr. TAYLOR. I was hoping they would not adopt the method of doing it--
Senator KEFAUVER. In Senate joint resolution 133, which I referred
Mr. TAYWR. I have not seen that.
PIWAIDENTIAL INA/111611'Y	89
Senator licrAtIvEit.' Which is one of the resolutions that I have filed, not that I am sure (hilt iA the method that sliould be followed, because I do have another resolution, it provides the Congress may provide by law for the procedure for—
(I) determining ibr inability, of the President to discharge the powers and duties and (2) determining When the Inability of the President to discharge the. powers and dillies of his office has ceased to exist.
Mr. TA	Doesn't t hat say substantially the same thing in slightly
more words?
Senator ItEYM,V111. I suppose it does.
I. TAvi.on. I mean it is implicit in that sentence that I read that if the President-- -
Senator ICErArvrat. no you think it, is clear in your language whether the President could recover his office?
M. TAvLon. Yes, certainly, because you see I use the words "commencement and termination of inability."
Senator ICErmwen. And you would feel that the termination of inability would automatically carry with the ren.ssumption of the. duties of the President by the. President?
Mr. T.syr.ott. I would think so, because the preceding language says, "Ill case of the inability." In the language at the end of articleII, section 1, you have "and such officer shall act accordingly until the disability 1,e removed."
It may be a little too brief, but I would think it would be a necessary, consequence that the termination carries with it the end of the period of inability.
Senator KErAliwca. Now Mr. Taylor, let's point out some of the arguments against theroposal that you have made and the somewhat similar ones made in Senate joint resolution 1:13.
The first is that the President and the Executive Office itself would like to know before they give their approval to a proposal like this just what kind of machinery is going to be set up.
The Attorney General has expressed the ideas I read in the paper—and he will testify here sometime soon—that----
Mr. TArtAat. May I interrupt you? Is his proposal the sameas was put forward by Mr. Brownell the former Attorney General, or don't you know that
Senator KEntivr.a. As I get it, his proposal is that the Cabinet members should make the determination,
but in any event, it should be an executive determination and not a legislative or a judicial one. Mr. TAY1,011. That is substantially, the same.
Senator KEFAUVER. Yes; it is substantially the same, I take it, so that the first thing is that the executive department. would like to know what the rule is going to be before they agree to it, and the second thing is that this is a matter of such great concern to the people that any amendment to the Constitution should not just delegate the power to the Congress but should enable the people themselves to decide by the ratification of the amendment what the new rule will be.
What is your answer to those arguments?
Mr. TAMOtt. I had assumed that a statute would be drafted now at the same time that the amendment was proposed, which would set forth the method which would implement this section.
90	YnESI1)E\-TIAL INAMUTY
Senator KErAuvr.a. In other words, so that everybody might have before them just what the Congress has in mind.
Mr. TAYLOR. There are two reasons for that. One is to meet the point which you brought up. The other is that the school of thought that it requires no constitutional amendment might regard the passage of such a statute as a stopgap. While I do not hold that view, it is very largely held.
Senator ICErAr mi. In other words, that as a stopgap measure the Congress go on and pass a statute, but in the meantime have submitted a resolution for an amendment.
Mr. TAYLOR. That is it.
Senator ICErAuvra. 'lo give Congress the power.
Well, sir, do you not think that the passage of a stopgap amendment might deter or take away the interest in passing a constitutional amendment?
Mr. TAYLOR. Yon mean n stopgap statute?
Senator IR-mum. A stopgap statute.
Mr. TAYLOR. Yes, I do; but you would be better able to judge that than I would. I mean that is more a political question than a legal one.
Possibly all that would be necessary would be a statement which would satisfy the Executive. as to the general theory of how the con-st it ut Iowa amendment was to be carried out by statute.
Senator ICErmiyiat. Well, this Congress might make n statement about how we expected to carry it out, although I doubt that we would ever get everybody together on a statement. But. the complexion of Congress might change very materially.
Mr. TAYLOR. Yes.
Senator Kr.FAU VER. From this session to the next one, end One would not be binding on the other.
Mr. T.tyLoa. Even the fashion in constitutional amendments has changed.
Senator KEFAUVF.R. Assuming a stopgap statute, or assuming that the substance of a stopgap statute were presented as a constitutional amendment, what would be your preference or what would be your idea about who should do the deciding on inability and removal of inability?
Mr. rtAyika. You mean what such a statute should he, in general ? Senator KIEFAVVER. Yes.
Mr. TAYLOR. My own view is, and some of my committee members do not agree with me, that Congress should create a permanent. and relatively small tribunal.
The objection to it which my colleagues make is that they would be responsible to no one and they might take too long to make a decision.
Senator KFFAITER. You mean in the New York State be- committee there is a—
Mr. TAYLOR. That is right.
Senator KEFAUVER. There is a division of opinion?
Mr. TAYLOR. Yes.
Senator 'CIF:FM-E'ER. How many members, incidentally, are on the subcommittee ?
Mr. TAYLOR. The full committee is about 15. The subcommittee is Elihu Root, Arthur Dean, and myself.
PRFAIDENTIAL INABILITY	91
Senator KErdtuvEn. Is it, getting down to too much detail to tell the positions of each of you? You are each distinguished lawyers, Arthur Dena, Elihu Root, and Martin Taylor. You feel that BOW permanent• commission should be established I
Mr. Tnyt,os. The only divergence is Mr. Root does not agree with me about that. Ile leans toward the Cabinet idea.
Senator ICErAtivEa. Mr. Root leans toward the Cabinet idea? Mr. TAYLOR. Yes.
Senator KErAuvra. And how about Mr. Bean?
Mr. TAvt,ou. 11e has not expressed any special view about it either way 011 that point.
Senator KErAtivr.a. And you in your own opinion, speaking as an individual, and not as chairman of this committee, what kind of commission would you have established?
Mr. TAMIL Well, not more than say 7 people. I have not thought out, how to pick the 7 people or 0, if you please, but• a small number, but to servo during the whole of the term of say 6 years or some such period.
Senator Itzr,ttivga. Serving during a term of 6 years.
Mr. TAyut. Well, a period longer than any given Congress is my idea or any given political party.
Senator KseAuvEu. I do not wish to particularize resolutions that 1 have filed, but. I had another one here just for the purpose of discussion, S. J. Res. 134, which would have the question of inability and commencement and termination of inability determined by the Cabinet plus the four leaders of the two Houses of Congress, two in the I louse and two in the Senate, with the Chief Justice of the United States acting as the chairman of the committee, but with no power to vote. That I believe would be a committee with the present heads of the executive departments, or 10 in number, the four leaders of Congress would make 14, and provides that there must be the affirmative vote of a majority, which would make it 8.
Mr. TAmon. And the Chief Justice is 15.
Senator KrauvErt. And the Chief Justice would be 15. He has no vote, but, there has to be an affirmative vote of 8 members in order to find inability or removal of inability. Would you see any objection to bringing in the heads of the executive departments and the leaders of Congress?
Ml'. TAYLOR. No.
Senator ICEPAUVER. Do you think a committee of 15, 14 actually with the presiding officer who would have no vote, would be too many?
Mr. TAYLOR. I would not say too many, but I think the smaller the better, because if you are faced with the necessity of relatively quick action, the smaller tribunal you would have, the better. And as they obviously would have great responsibility, I do not think it is a power that would be abused by anybody, no matter how small the committee.
Senator KEFAUVER. The Chief Justice of the United States has written a letter speaking for all of the Court that the Supreme Court does not want to serve in the deciding commission, and I understand the logic of that, and I think it, is sound, that the Court should not be the one to make the determination, because as Judge Musmanno has pointed out, they might have to decide upon the constitutionality or the legality of certain actions taken.
02	PHESIDNNTIAL INABILITY
Mr. TAYLOR. Theratis a farther objection' to it. I think that you would probably have to einem( the Constitution to enlarge the Judges'
power.	,
Senator KEPAVVF.IL Yes.
Mr. TAYLOR. And also there is n considerable thought, I think,-as the discussion at the time of the Nuremberg trial, indicates that the Judges should confine, themselves to legal matters.
Senator Kmitvint. That, is correct. I think it goes beyond the jurisdiction that any of us would like to see. the Court take on. But would on see any objection to the Chief Justice merely presiding at the committee meeting without the power of voting?
Mr. TAYLos. I see no necessity for it
Senator It-mtivsit. My thought in that connection was that it, would add dignity and be it safeguard to action by the committee, and I had in mind similar action by the Chief Justice in impeachment proceedings in the Senate,
Mr. T.tvion. .1 do not, think that is really very important either way. Senator ICEFAVVER. 1)o you feel, sir that the majority of the Com-
inission or Committee should be of theCabinet, who presumably would
have more intimate knowledge of the President's ability and condition? Mr. TAYLOR. They should have.
In the case of Wilson, that was not the fact. A small group of people surrounding the President had the facts and the Cabinet did not
Certainly you would expect the Cabinet to have great knowledge. Senator KErAuvrit. Mr. Smithey, do you have any questions to ask of Mr. Taylor?
Mr. Smrriinv. Mr. Taylor, I think yon submitted a letter to the Itouse Judiciary Committe.
Mr. TAYLOR. •Prhat is right.
Mr. SmrritEr. At, the time, that committee-wits undertaking a similar consideration of this problem. In the course of that submission You stated that shortly before the appearance of the Attorney General before that Committee, the Committee on Federal Constitution of the New York State Bar Association had presented a suggested amendment to the committee.
Mr. TAYLOR. That is right.
Mr. SurrnEr. What were the provisions of that proposed amendment
Mr. TAYLOR. It covers the possibility of permanent--I will give
you a copy of it,	•
Mr. S3trruity. While you are looking for that,-Mr. Taylor, I take it from the langnage'of that letter that it was the position of the full committee,- the 15-member committee on the Federal Constitution of the New York State Bar Association, that, an amendment to the Constitution would be required in order to correct the defect in the Constitution.
Mr. TAYLOR. That is correct.
Senator KEFAVVER. So' we can have it in this record, suppose we have copied in this record--
Mr. TAYLOR. It simply Amplifies the short sentence that. I gave you.
Senator XEFAIIVER. Suppose we have placed in our record at this mint the presentation by Mr. Martin Taylor of April 1, 1957, to the House Committee.
PitEBIDENTIAL INABILITY	93
('rho document referred to is as follows:)
COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY, MUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES.
On April 1, 1057, a statement .on Presidential inability was presented to your subcommittee by the Attorney General. Shortly before that the committee on Federal Constitution of time Now York State Bar Association presented to your subcommittee a suggested amendment dealing with that problem. It did not then have before It the recommendations of the Attorney General. However, it agrees with him that in removal, death and resignation the office devolves but that in the case of inability the duties and not the office devolve upon the Vice President, that such inability may be terminated, resulting in the President taking up his duties. It agrees that a constitutional amendment is the beat solution. It is true that by usage in those cases where it was impossible for the President to return, the Vice President has taken the oath of office, although there Is no specific constitutional sanction therefor. A constitutional nmendnient would forever remove doubt as to this. Such diverse views have been expressed on the question of whether Congress has the power to legislate on inability that It may be contemplated that if such power were exercised by virtue of an act of Congress without constitutional sanction it would be tested in the courts. For those reasons the committee has advocated constitutional amendment.
Our subcommittee on Presidential inability, of which I am the chairman, and Messrs. Elihu Root, Jr., amid Arthur II. Dean are the other members, have not met since the statement of the Attorney (lenerni so there has been time for informal discussions only. hence this memorandum In submitted as an expression of my own views although in general concurred In by the others.
While the Attorney General advocates constitutional amendment, he does so on a completely different ground. Ills expressed view Is that the Vice President could not be divested, without constitutional amendment, of the power of deter-Initiation which he now has. The reason for divesting him of that power is that he should be given n more limited power to declare inability and then only with the consent of a majority of the cabinet who are executive officers. This memorandum is not primarily concerned with the policy of how to deal with the question of inability but is submitted in the hope that it may offer some suggestions to those having responsibility as to the interpretation of the Constitution. It is submitted that the interpretation of the Vice President's power advocated by time Attorney General and his recommendation as to the Cabinet acting with the Vice President could not have been within the contemplation of the framers for the following reasons:
First, It would have been a simple matter to have said that the determination of inability should be made by the Vice President. The debates rather indicate that they avoided who was to raise and determine inability. Nor was It likely that the framers expected that the Vice President would act deterred either by fear of the accusation of usurpation or reluctance induced by loyalty. Also the exercise of such a power without explicit direction would have been made at his peril and might lead to an extraordinary situation in some cases, as for example, where the President declared himself able to perform or resume his duties.
Second, at the time the Constitution was adopted, the Vice President was the candidate who received the second largest number of votes. The supporters of the rival candidates held quite strongly divergent views which very soon crystallized Into a party organization. It seems unlikely that it was in the purview of the draftsman that a recently defeated candidate for President, then serving as Vice President, should be given power under any circumstances to determine the ability of the successful candidate to perform his duties.
Of course, it could not have been within the purview of the framers that the Cabinet should have any responsibility in the matter as the Cabinet was not then created.
As against the view that this power has been held since 1787 it should be considered that (a) it has never been exercised, possibly for the reason that it was feared that the office would be vacated; (b) that It required congressional action to Implement it; (o) that such implied power was not sufficiently recognized to justify.rellance on it.
The Attorney General argues -that the Vice Pretident has always had this power. He does not deal with the troublesome question which would arise if a President and 4,Viee President disagreed on the right of determination. Ills argument, is based on the premise that since the Vice President has the duty of acting in certain contingencies he is clothed with the duty to determine when
22324-58-7
PIWAIDENTIAL INABILITY
that contingency exists. It doe* not, of course, so stale in OM Constitution but the Attorney (leneral contends that it is a well-estnidished rule of law that n contingent power gives Its grantee the right to determine when to exercise It. In support of this legal generalisation four roses are cited. (See citation 26 to Attorney (lenertti's memorandum.)
There was sustained In the Aurora case In 1813 the President's right to proclaim terinitudion of embargo, in the Martin case in MT to calling out the militia, and in the Flehl case In 1881 and the Hampton case in 1028, the right to determine clurging stale of facts to vary tariff. Each of the above acts was done In put% seance of express authority given the President by Congress. This Is an entirely different matter from saying that power may he implied where express direction Is not given.
The logical conclusion in the Interpretation of any constitutional language directing that something he done would be flint someone was directed to do It. Unfortunntely that does not appear to be so here unless Congress under Its broad powers was expected to Implement It. If by Inference it was expected that anyone had the power without. congressional implementation, It is submitted that it would he more likely to be the President himself at least where he was able mid willing. The view of the Attorney Beneral is that It requires constitutional amendment to give the President this power and a constitutional amendment to divest the fire President of a power which he always had and apparently the President never hail. It is submitted that not for this reason but for chnoililea. Lion a constitutional nmendment should be adopted to settle the question of our, eession to office where the President cannot resume his duties mind of devotion attunes where he may be able to.
11f Aram TAYLOR. April a, I657.
Copy for infornintion of Attorney (immoral: Cornelius W. Wickersham, bar association commiltee chnirman: Atihur II, bean, Esq.: Elliot Root, Jr., Esq.
Mr. T.kyLon. On the page preceding the statement that 1 tnade there,
you will find--
Senator 10EFAuvr.n. It, is on page 12, is it. not, Mr. Taylor?
Mr. TAyi.on. What is the date of it?
Senator KErmivER. On the House hearings that. we have here of
April 1, 1957, the full text of Mr. Wickersham's letter is set. forth.
1, 1957, the full text of Mr. Wiekersham's letter is set forth.
Mr. INvf.ou. That is right.
Isn't the resolution of Mr. Wickersham contained in it?
Mr. REFAUVEIL 'rite resolution is contained in it.
M r. TAvt.on. That is right.
Senator Kt:V.117CM We will have Mr. Wickersham's letter made a
part of our hearing too.
me document referred to is as follows: )
NEM YORK STATE. IIAR ASSOCIATION,
Con n irrEF: ON FEDERAL. CONSTITUTION,
3farch 29, 1957.
lion. I-NANt•Er, CEr.r.rs,
Comm/lice on The Judiciary.
!louse of Representatives, Washington, I). C.
DEAR MP. CELLER : AR you know, the committee on the Federnl Constitution of the New York State liar Association has studied the question of Presidential Inability for some months and has given consideration to the ninny suggestions made to the Judiciary Subcommittee on the subject.
As a result it is felt by this committee that a constitutional amendment is necessary. and that the amendment should provide in substance. .
(a) That the commencement and termination of any inability should be determined by such method as Congress should by law provide: and ( b) In case of the inability of the President, that the Vice President should succeed only to the powers and duties of the office and not to the office itself. It is clear that in its present form the fifth clause of section 1 of article II of the Constitution leaves open the matter of determination of what constitutes Inability and fails to authorize anyone to deal either with the beginning or the end of the
PitEk3IMINTIA14 INABILITY	95
disability. This fact has been n matter of embarrassment to the Oovernment in the past and could be n matte: of national disaster in the future.
The question of what happens on the death of a President and whether the Vice President then succeeds to the office or succeeds only to the powers and duties of the office has been settled by historical tradition. As we all know the Vice President is sworn in as President upon the death of the latter. Presumably the same thing would happen In case of the resignation of the President or of his removal from office.
On the other hem!, it is not clear whether In case of Presidential inability the Vice President would become President or would only be authorized to act as President ns one succeeding to the powers and duties of the office. The words "the snme" have never been construed in this connection and this fart adds to the confusion which is so apparent in the recent discussions on the subject.
It is extremely doubtful whether Congress has power to deal with the matter without n constitutional nmendment and clearly the ambiguity of the present provisions cannot be cured by net of Congress alone.
Our committee concludes that a constitutional amendment is necessary for any final or authoritative solution of the problem and therefore recommends for your consideration that the fifth clause of section 1 of article 11 of the Constitu- tion should be amended to read ns follows:
"In rose of the Removal of the President from Office. or of his Death or Resignation, the said Offive Audi devolve on the Vice President. In Case of the Inability of the President to discharge the Powers and I-aties of the said Office, the 511141 Powers and Indies shall devolve on the Vice President. until the Disability be removed. The Congress luny by law provide for the Case of Removal, Death, Resignation or Inability, both of the President nail Vice President, de•dnriug what Officer shall then be President, or in Case of inability net as President, and such Officer shall he or net as President accordingly, until a President shell he elected, or, In Case of Inability, until the Disability shall be earlier removed, The commeneement and termination of any Inability shall be determined by such method as Congress shall by law provide."
if this amendment shall he adopted it would 11101111 that in case of the &alb. resignation, or reinevni from office of the President, the Vim President would be sworn to as President. In ease of the President's inability, however. the Vice President would only nut as, President. having his powers and duties. until the disability was reinov4.91. Congress would 1$' called npon to enact legislation determining the method by which the commeneement and termination of any inability should be determined.
In view of the amonnt Of time that would necessarily pass before adoption of the nmentiment there would be plenty of time for your committee to consider what method should be adopted by Congress for this determination.
In ease of the inability of both the President anti Vice President, the change contained in the amendment proposed above is designed to make it plain that the officer who shall then act as President shall do so on a temporary basis until the disability Is removed or n President elected.
It Is believed tint no amendment would be sufficient to meet the problem without providing for the determination of the question of commencement and termination of inability of the President or the Vice President, or without separating the provisions relating to inability from those relating to death, resignation, or removal, thus removing the ambiguity involved in the present language.
I sincerely hope that the foregoing will be of assistance to you and your committee in your consideration of this vital subject, and I am enclosing additional copies of this letter for the other members of the subeommittee, and am sending further copies to the committee's general counsel.
Respectfully and sincerely yours,
CORNELIUS W. WICKERSHAM, Chairman.
Senator ICI:I•'.tin•I:u. Mr. Wickersham's proposal for a constitutional amendment was, and the amendment. should provide in substance:
(a) That the commencement and termination of any inability should be determined by such method as Congress should by law provide, and (b) in case of the Inability of the President. that the Vice President should succeed only to the powers and duties of the office and not to the office itself.
The first part of that is exactly what you have presented here. Mr. TAYKOR. That is right.
96	PIIMIDENTIAL INABILITY
Some of them felt that it, ought, to say in terms that, it was the
devolution of the duties and not the office should be covered in the
amendment. I do not think that, is particularly important.
I do not think it is necessary, but if it is, it could be added as it is in
that draft.
Senator 10EFAIIVER. But the idea there was that inasmuch as there
was a probability or a possibility that the President would resume the
'office, that during that interim the Vice President should—
Mr. TAYLOR, That. view had been expressed SO often that we thought
possibly It would stop it forever if you said it in terms as it is in that
proposed amendment.
Senator ICErAtivxa. MI right, sir. Anything else, Mr. Smithey!
Mr. SMITHEY. This study that your committee undertook, how long
was that study?
Mr. Tavi.on. I think it started about March 1956.
SMITIIEY. So that it has been underway almost 2 years?
Mr. TAYLOR. That is right.
Mr. SMITHEY. YOU made a recommendation as a subcommittee to
this full committee headed by Mr. Wickersham!
Mr. TAYLOR. That is right,
Mr. SMITIIEY. And they in turn adopted this report?
Mr. TAYLOR. That is correct,
Mr. SMITHEY. Has it been presented to the State bar?
Mr. TAYLOR. That is correct.
Mr. SMITHEY. Has it been adopted by the bar of the State of New
York?
Mr. TAYLOR. No, it, cannot be because it has just gone up there now.
As you know, those things move rather slowly.
Tins printed record of it which I just Kot the other day is the sub-
mission to the State bar association. This is the report of the com-
mittee. There is a rubber stamp on it January 23, 1057.
Senator ICEFAMER. May I see that?
Mr. SMITIIEY. There is a statement, in the letter of Mr. Wickersham
to the House committee—
It is extremely doubtful whether Congress has power to deal with the matter without a constitutional amendment, and clearly the ambiguity of the present provisions cannot be cured by act of Congress alone.
Is that in accord with your thinking?
Mr. TAYLOR. Oh, yes.
Mr. Slummy. And the thinking of your subcommittee?
Mr. TAYLOR. That is right. And the full committee as well. There is no great difference of view about it. I do not want to give a wrong impression about it.
As I say, simply Mr. Root leaned toward the Cabinet idea.
Senator KEFAUVER. In order that anyone reading this record may appreciate more fully the thought of people who have gone into this recommendation which has been submitted by Mr. Taylor here, I think it might be well to read the names of those composing the full Constitutional Committee of the New York Bar Association.
In addition to yourself, Cornelius W. Wickersham, Theodore Pearson, Eli IT Bronstein, Arthur H. Dean,Lewis R. Gulick, John W. AfacDonn' John J. Mackrell, Leonard P. Moore, Welles V. Moot, Archie B. ,,forrison, George Roberts, Churchill Rodgers, Elihu Root,
Prmetnk:N•riA b INABILITY	07
Jr. Arthur II. Schwartz, Harrison Tweed, and of course, Mr. Martin Ta;vlor.
'That is a very distinguished group of lawyers, Mr. Taylor.
Mr. TAYLOR. We still haven't solved the question.
Senator KEFAUYER. Mr. Smithey.
Mr.. SMITHEY. Mr. Chairman, I have one further question and I think that will dispose of tho questions that I have.
I think it was the position of the Attorney General before the House committee that. the determination of a disability of the President was essentially a decision for the executive branch, and that under the eep-aration-of-powers doctrine, it should be committed to that branch of the Government alone.
Mr. TAYLOR. Yes.
Mr. SUMIEY. Do you see any question of separation of powers involved in the determination of inability?
Mr. TAYLOR. No.
Mr. SU ITI I EY. I have no further questions.
Senator KiwAtivRa. Would you amplify on that a little bit?
Mr. TAYLOR. I did not think there was anything to support that statement except the wish to have it so. It is a question basically, first of constitutional power, second of legislation under that power. The Constitution as such simply provides the basic rule. What you do in pursuance of that is a matter of statute.
There is nothing in the Attorney General's memorandum which indicates why it is so that that is an Executive decision.
Mr. SMITH Ey. You would see no violation of the doctrine of separation of powers?
Mr. TAvr.on. No.
Mr. SMMIEY. If the decision as to inability was given to another branch of the Government?
Mr. TAYLOR. No.
Senator ICEFAUYER. I think that, as a matter of practical application, it is well to have at least a majority of those who are going to pass upon the question, people who should be familiar with the ability of the President and in everyday touch with him and his actions, so that they could pass upon the question more intelligently.
But I agree with you that I see no constitutional reason why this should be the case.
Mr. TAYLOR. It may be practical and expedient but that is another matter.
Senator ICEFAUVER. Well, we certainly do thankyou, Mr. Taylor, for the consideration you and your committee have given this problem, and we have a great respect for the judgment and the conclusions reached by the committee of which you are the head, and your own individual conclusions and views upon this subject.
We thank you very much for coming down and giving us the benefit of your testimony.
I think it would be well to put the New York State Bar Association report dated December 31,195?, in the record, if there is no objection.
98	PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY
(The report referred to is as follows
Bryan OF commirrEa ON i;'EDERAI. CONSTITUTION
To the Members of the New York State Mar Association:
PRESIDENTIAL INAIIILITY
The Committee on the Federal Constitution has studied the question of Presidential inability under article IL section 1, of the Constitution, and has had the advantage of reports from a subcommittee consisting of Messrs. Martin Taylor, Arthur II. Dean, and Bilhu Root, Jr., who nmde n special study of the question.
It is clear that In its present form the fifth clause of section 1 leaves open the matter of determination of what constitutes inability and fails to provide the method of determining either the beginning or the end of the disability. This fact has been a mutter of embarrassment to the Government in the past and could be a matter of national disaster in the future.
At present the fifth clause of the section rends as follows:
"In Case of the Removal of the President from Office, or of his Death, Resig-nntton, or Inability to discharge the Powers and Ditties of the said Office, the Same shalt devolve on the Vice President, and the Congress may by law provide for the Case of Removal, Death, Resignation or Inability, both of the President and Vice President, declaring what Officer shall then Act as President, and such Officer shall net accordingly, unlit the Disability be removed, or a President shall be elected."
Thus Congress is authorized to provide for the case of removal, death, resignation or inability of both President amt Viee President, declaring what °Meer shall then act as President, until the disability is removed, or a President elected. In consequence, Congress has enacted the so-called Succession Acts, designating who shall so act.
Rut the Constitution fails to give similar authority to Congress with respect to the matter here discussed. Only an amendment to the Constitution can cure this def'et.
Several suggestions have been made proposing an act of Congress or an amendment, none of which appear to be adequate to meet the issue in a manner that would be understood by or acceptable to the American people, a consideration of highest importanee. These include proposals that the President should make the determination, or the Vice President or the Cabinet or both ; or that a canunisslon either of selected officials or distinguished citizens should be Appointed for the purpose. Another proposal Is that the matter be referred to the courts. And there are other suggestions.
But these are matters that by proper constitutional practice should be decided by Congress, the representatives of the people of the country. Just as the Con'. stitution now authorizes Congress to provide by law for succession where both President and Vice President are unable to act, so should similar authority be given to Congress to provide the method of determination of the vital question of inability to act.
Moreover, each of the various proposed methods of determination is untried and open to objections. To freeze any one method into the Constitution now would make correction in the light of future experience or change of circumstances extremely difficult, because it would require an additional constitutional amendment. This danger can be avoided by a constitutional amendment which gives Congress the power to select the method; then correction or improvement could be made at any time by Congress enacting a new law.
The question of What happens on the death of the President and whether the Vice President then succeeds to the office, or succeeds only to the powers and duties of the office, has been settled by historical tradition. As we all know, the Vice President is sworn in as President upon the death of the President.
Presumably, the same thing would happen in case of the resignation of the President or of his removal from office. Presumably also, in case of Presidential inability, the Vice President would only be authorized to act as President, succeeding to the powers and duties of the office only. But this conclusion has been questioned. The words "the same" have never been construed and this fact adds to the confusion which is apparent in the recent discussions on the subject in Washington and elsewhere. It Ise! the highest importance that the Constitution should be clear on this point, and that the text should be readily understandable not only to lawyers, but to laymen as well.
PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY	09
As a result it is felt by this committee that a constitutional amendment is necessary, and that the amendment should provide in substance:
"(a) That the commencement and termination of any inability should be determined by such method as Congress shall by law provide; and
"(b) In case of the Inability of the President, that the Vice President should succeed only to the powers and duties of the office and not to the office itself."
At best it is extremely doubtful whether Congress has power to deal with the matter without a constitutional amendment and clearly any malignity of the present provisions cannot be cured by act of Congress alone.
This committee concludes that a constitutional amendment is necessary for any final or authoritative solution of the problem and recommends that the fifth clause of section 1 of article II of the Constitution should be amended to read as follows:
"In Case of the Removal of the President from Office, or of his Death or Resignation, the said Office shall devolve on the Vice President. In Case of the Inability of the President to discharge the Powers and Duties of the said Office, the said Powers and Duties shall devolve on the Vice President, until the Inability be removed. The Congress may by law provide for the Case of Red:oval, Death, Resignation or Inability, both of the President and Vice President, declaring what Officer shall then be President, or in ease of Inability, act as President, and such Officer shall be or act as President accordingly, until a President shall be elected, or, in case of Inability, until the Inability shall be earlier removed. The commencement and termination of any Inability shall be determined by such method as Congress shall by law provide."
If this amendment is adopted it would mean that in case of the death, resignation, or removal from office of the President, the Vice President would be sworn in as President. In case of the President's inability, however, the Vice President would only act as President, having his powers and duties, until the inability was removed or a President elected. Congress would be called upon to enact legislation providing the method by which the commencement and termination of any inability should be determined.
In view of the amount of time that would necessarily pass before the adoption of the amendment there would be plenty of opportunity for the congressional committees to consider what method should be adopted by Congress for this determination.
In case of the inability of both the President and Vice President, the change contained in the amendment proposal above is designed to make it plain that the officer who shall then act as President under and pursuant to the Succession Act shall do so on a temporary basis until the inability is removed or a President elected.
It is believed that no amendment would be sufficient to meet the problem without providing for the determination of the question of commencement and termination of Inability of the President or the Vice President, or without separating the provisions relating to inability from those relating to death, resignation, or removal, thus removing any ambiguity involved in the present language.
The committee does not believe that the amendment should prescribe the method for determination of the facts relating to inability. It la better constitutional practice to leave that matter to Congress, which under our proposed amendment Congress would be authorized to provide for by legislation.
On March 29, 1957, the chairman of this committee wrote to Hon. Emanuel Geller, chairman, Committee on the Judiciary, House of Representatives, presenting the views of our committee with additional copies for other members of the subcommittee and for general counsel. Our letter was given wide publicity at the time and was later printed in the report of the hearing of April 1, 1957. In commenting on our views, Congressman Keating stated that he wanted to say parenthetically that he understood that our committee did not agree with anybody on this problem, adding "which is par for this course." His statement as to our nonagreement was something of an exaggeration since we do agree with the former Attorney General, Mr. Brownell, that at least a constitutional amendment is necessary.
100	PIIRSIDNNTIAL INAMIATY
MR NSW URIORNR AllIMPMRAT
For masons slated In earlier reports of this committee we continued nt our last meeting to oppose the so-called Bricker nmemitnent na set forth In Senator BrIcker's proposed treaty control amendment and accompanying statement ($5 CongressIonni Rceord, Senate, pp. 250-200, Jan.?, I057).
Dated; December 91, 1057.
Respectfully submitted.
Cornelius W. Wickersham, Chairman; Theodore Pearson, Secretary; En it. Bronstein, Arthur R. MAO, Lewis R. (Wick. John W. MneDonnid, John J. Mftekrell, Leonard P. Moore, IVoltes V. Moot. Archie H. Morrison, ammo Roberts, Churchill Rodgers, Rilhu Root, Jr., Arthur It. Schwarts, Martin Taylor, Harrison Tweed.
Senator NI:MUM. We are glad to hear from any interested citizen, and Mr. Charles Kress of Binghamton, N. Y., who has been an official up there, has ft suggestion ho would like to make at this time.
STATEMENT OF CHARLES KRESS, CONSULTANT, BINGHAMTON, N. Y.
Mr. Ka s. Mr. Chairman, T will be very brief, realizing the shortage of time.
I would say my views represent perhaps the suggestions and opinions of the man on the street.
I am a former mayor of Binghamton, N. Y., and have been a consultant to various, ond° and I louse committees.
I have been greatly intrigued by this problem and have given it considerable study.
Of course, I am somewhat. abashed to testify in thepresence of such legal genius and brilliance as there is here. The Constitution provides now that in case of death, resignation, or removal of the President, the Vice President automatically takes over the office without any action by Congress or the Supremo ourt.
Is it not reasonable to ASS111110 that the same thing was intended by the Constitution makers in respect to Presidential inability, that the Vice President is to take over automatically without any action by Congress? If a President dies or resigns, Congress does not have to meet and elect the Vico President. He automatically takes the job. In fact, the Constitution seems to limit the powers of Congress to legislate in this field only in case both the President. and the Vice President are out of the picture, and then only on the matter of succession.
A constitutional amendment could take considerable time to come into being, and the President himself has stated that ho felt there is a present urgency in this matter.
Something along the lines of my plan could take effect, immediately. I would not propose to change in any respect the present provisions or at least the intent of the Constitution that the Vico President automatically takes over when the President is unable to act. I would merely set up by legislation a formal procedure by which the Vice President does this. A speedy process is imperative in these jet-age
days.
The Vice President cannot just go over to the White House door
and shout, "I'm taking over." They might not even let him in. There has to be some offioial ceremony to be observed. But in the first analysis it seems up to the Vice President to initiate this process.
PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY	101
It seems that it is his duty to do so under the Constitution. This all presumes that there is the spirit of good will and mutual dedication to the public good existing between the President and the Vico President.
There has been some disposition I think in some of the plans suggested to make it easier for the Vice President, but that does not seem to jibe with the Constitution. It is a big part of his job whether ho likes it or not. History may show that at least two Vice Presidents wore reluctant or oven refused to do what might be considered their duty in this respect. But that, wog in a different age and vastly different tittles. In these times of greater pplitical education of instantaneous public information over press wires, TV and radio, and the more powerful effectiveness of public opinion, X do not believe a Vice President would hesitate to do his duty if the safety of the Nation warranted it and start the operation of Inking over when the President is unable to act.
I feel this important question must be approached with a perspective entirely disassociated from today and present personalities—and projected into the years ahead.
If a President finds his condition is such that he wants the Vice President to temporarily take over and act, and there is complete harmony and understanding between the two men, it does not appear to me that any now legislation is needed.
Suppose that as of now wo had a President who had become hope. lessly paralyzed, mentally as well as physically, and the Vice President; the Cabinet, and the White House staff all knew the President was incompetent, and they all agreed the Vice President ought to take over.
So he does take over, issuing a proclamation that the President has been unable to act, and as Vice President he is assuming the Presidential office. Who would there be to stop him?
Congress couldn't do it. Only the Supreme Court would have the power to say whether ho acted within the Constitution or not.
All the discussions I have heard seem to relate to medical disabilities of the President which would render him unable to act. I can think beyond this to a situation where, fantastic as it may seem, the President might in time of war be captured by the enemy and thus be unable to act.
At one time President Roosevelt, in wartime flew over enemy territory and one of his escort planes nearly had to ditch. It could have been the Presidential plane forced down in enemy territory. And wartime conditions could also make ineffective any plan of succession which required congressional action, because under thermonuclear
war the Washington Government might be completely wiped out. Now the plan I have in mind was this:
I. Tho question of Presidential disability is a matter of deep public concern today.
The Constitution provides that the Vice President shall take over in event of the President's inability to act. But just how this process
would take place is not made clear, and undoubtedly there will be a number of measures introduced in ongress at the coming session, trying to clarify the situation, these including proposed constitutional amendments.
102	PRES! DENT! A L !NADI IATY
2. I would leave the Constitution alone and try to clear the matter up with a bill which, would provide as follows: When the President suffers disability which prevents him from acting, the Vice President and the Senate and House leaders of the President's political party, would prepare a certificate setting forth the facts, including medical evidence, and declaring that the Vice President is temporarily assuming the Presidential powers at a certain time.
This certificate would then be filed with the Supremo Court which -would then immediately convene, review the facts and circumstances sot forth in the certificate, and determine if the proposed action was within the Constitution.
The Supreme Court will have the power, but only by unanimous vote, to disapprove the certificate, in which case the Vice President could not take over.
The Court would thus serve as a brake an any hasty ur ill-advised action, but en emergency would not have to wait upon any possibly delayed formal Court approval. If the Court could not. agree promptly to disapprove the certificate, then the proceeding would go ahead and the Vice President take over at the time declared.
3. Plainly the question of disability and inability to act cannot be left entirely to a President as he might have a paralyzing disability and be incapable of coherent, thinking.
The question of replacing a temporarily disabled President is a constitutional ono and it is the unquestioned limper function of the Supremo Court to interpret our Constitution. Thus under my plan the Court would always exercise disapproval powers in each case where the question of replacing a temporarily disabled President might arise.
4. To prevent the remote possibility that some overly ambitious Vice President might try to "steal" the Presidential Office by refusing to give it back to a fully recovered President, my method would further provide that once a disabled President has recovered, ho would then file a certificate of such fact with the Supreme Court announcing the time he would resume his Presidential powers.
If the Supreme Court expressed no unanimous disapproval, the President would then automatically resume his office at the time set forth in his certificate.
The same procedure would he employed in case a Vice President temporarily acting as President, also became disabled and had to be replaced:
I realize that this is not a constitutional amendment suggestion, and I submit it. perhaps as a stopgap measure which might possibly have some chance of enactment. in this Congress.
I know I am asking now a question that is in the minds and hearts of every thinking citizen of the United States when I ask the honorable chairman, and I ask you from your point of legal brilliance, what is going to happen to this country.today if our President tonight, God forbid that. it should happen, would be stricken with a paralyzing ailment that loft him mentally and physically helpless?
You, Mr. Musmanno; have said that if the Vice President did take over, there would be much, litigation. I think the public would like to know exactly what will intpoen.
Do you feel that the Vice President under those circumstances is violating any law or constitutional provision if he does take over?
NIES! DENT IA It INAn1I.ITY	103
We have got to have a President. Somebody has got to act, and who else but. him could do it ?
Mr. MirsmaNNo. You might address your question to the Chair. Mr. KuEss. I do.
Senator KErauvrit. That is a question we are considering here, Mr. 'Kress. I had always mistimed that, if there is no question of the President's inability, that the Vice President had the right to take over, but of course that does not avoid the fact that there might bo litigation, confusion, chaos, as Judge Musmanno has pointed out, and that also public opinion and our dealings in the field of foreign policy are also grave questions that have to be considered, so that, I think wo am all agreed that certainly this is a field that ought to bo clarified so that we can be sure that we have an able, responsible man acting and discharging the powers and duties of the Presidency at all times.
Mr. Kassa. Can I say this: If that disability did occur to the President as things stand today the Vice President would take over and wouldn't ho receive the support of the Congress and the people of the United States?
Senator ICEFAUVER. I am just a Senator who has ideas about the Constitution just, like Judge Musmanno and many other people do. Mr. KRESS. Thank you, Senator.
Senator ICErativEn. Thank you very much. I think it should be pointed out that the views of the man on the street and the view of laymen is very important in the consideration of this whole problem.
I am glad that Mr. Kress has expressed his point of view because public understanding is a very necessary ingredient of all of our actions under the Constitution and under our laws.
On Friday, the 14th, at 10 o'clock in this room we will hear from Mr. Henry Fowler, attorney of Washington, D. C. and former Director of the Office of Defense Mobilization. Also Prof. Edward Waugh, department of history and social sciences, Eastern Michigan College who has written extensively on this subject.
OnTuesday, February 18, the Attorney General is scheduled to appear at 10 o'clock, and on Friday, February 28, Mr. Charles Rhyne, the president of the American Bar Association is to appear before our committee.
Is there anything to be put in the record at this time, Mr. Smithey?
Mr. SMITHEY. Mr. Chairman, we have some statements from eminent persons in the field of constitutional law or in the field of Government, but, in accordance with your wishes in other hearings, I had delayed submitting those for inclusion in the record until the last session, in order that they might be printed in the appendix, if that is your desire.
Senator Karatrvaa. Very well, we will not in any event place them in the record at this meeting today.
We stand in recess, then, until Friday, February 14.
(Whereupon, at 12:30 p. m., the committee was recessed, to reconvene at 10 a. m., Friday, February 14, W58.)
-
PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY
rawkir, FEBRUARY 14, 1958
.	"	UNITED STATES SENATE,
Suscomurrrn ON CONDTTTUTIONAL AMENDMENTS,
OF THE COMMITTEE ON THE JUDIOIARTI,'•
•	Waahington,. D. O.
'rho subcommittee met; pursuant to	at 10i 15 a. m., 'room
	424,. Senate Office Buildin	auver (chairman of the
stibconimittee) pies'
Present: Sena
Also p Jerry A.
'Mahon
Mr. of th and are
you
: •
•	.:
on
VI
11
an
r of the
n
: 1
nd-
:v• 1
: 01
•	Fowler', HenryBonin, lawyei ; b. Roanoke, Va.' Sent. 5, 1908; s; Maok4j4inson Mut Bertha (BroWning) F."; A.B., Roaneke Coll.,' 1929 ; LLB. Yale, 1032,4.8.D., 1983; m:Trudy° Pamela Hathcote, Oct. 10,1938; children-7-Mary Anne, Susan Marla, Henry Hamill,. Admitted to Va. bar, 1933; coupeel Tenn. Valley Author!, By, '1!.N4-38, asst. gen. counsel, 1939; sPl. asst. to atty. gen: AS, chief Counsel subconplieuste Com. Edn. and Labor, 1939-40; Bpi. counsel Fed. Power. Cowan.
1		1 ;.asat. gen. counsel Q.P.M„ 1941, W.P.B., 1942-44; (von. advisor U. B. Mission
V.Affates, London, Rae., 1044; spL asst. to administr. Fgn. Neon. Administrb.,
1	1. dep.. ad ministr. N.P.A., 1051; administe., 4052 ; adminis tr. Defense. Product•
tip Administrn., 1952-53 ; dir. ,0131ce Of Defense kfahltimtlen, 1052-53; sr.' member. Pewter, Lthk. Mayne & Symington; Washington, 1N0,51, since 1963.. Etas.. Club; Metrop011an, (Washington). Roam 500 Queen St. Alexandria; Va.; Office: 1026 Eye St., Washington 0.
105
1:
tes
Ke

efauver.
Wayne H. Smithey, member,
Callaghan, legisl	assistant to
1 .4
fessional staff, and illitor Joseph O.
Wash Haw
Mr. various duction fense Mobil tion.
We have a rt biography of Mr. in the tecOrd at tin int.
	krill biograPhY re e	as folio
.	,
t	:
AVVER
owler	rof Senate WI not p any mem
1, but I assure you testimony. ate
oiti s and
•	Fowler, 11 youcoll ,Th.'s is Hen
Symin n of Was owler has held
•	ncies, am g istrati9
•	ill I
n, D.	018
OU 0 aroun Fo C.
to b
or,
0
1 porta which is dm
ill r
1:	1
t starts now.
ugh. am sorry that
e w	f Lincol
	me	rs 'of th
	me 11 be	tudy and
10
ore Members 's Birthday, committee appreciate
rifler
m
18
f the tablel s
.	.1
lawyer of ;; .. of F wler, Leval pitiona in Defense Pro-Office of De-
Fowler ich will be placed
it .11 I
I
rumentor of 'rector of
ghts of o r leading
e
106	PR I.:SIM:V[1AL INABILITY
Senator ICEPAtivEn. Ito is also a member of the bar of the State of Virginia.
Mr. Fowler, yen have a statement. The entire statement will be printed in the record, but, you may read it or discuss it as you wish.
STATEMENT OF HENRY FOWLER, ATTORNEY, WASHINOTON, D. C., FORMER DIRECTOR, OFFICE OF DEFENSE MOBILIZATION
Mr. FowLen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I shall attempt, to extemporize and discuss the statement, rather than mad it verbatim.
I mu very honored to be here as a witness before your subcommittee to participate in your deliberations on this very important question.
I mu not going to attempt to take up any historical background or analysis of many of the questions because I know you have many scholarly studies that arc much more inclusive that are available to you.
I want to, this morning, try to be helpful to the subcommittee, and I believe the only way I can be helpful is to try to present a very specific and concrete point of view that would promise a prompt and practical beginning on this very difficult problem.
I will say at the outset that it is my opinion it is legal and practical and desirable for the Congress by legislative enactment at this session to facilitate the orderly devolution upon the Vice President of the powers and duties of the President, in the event of the President's inability to discharge them, and a resumption by the President upon the passing of his inability.
1 do not believe a constitutional amendment should! be necessary, in view of the very general language of the inability clause which omits any specific method for initiating or determining an inability, and the availability of the so-called necessary and proper clause in section S of article I of the Constitution.
There are two provisos to this opinion that Congress can act without constitutional amendment. They have to do with the nature of the enactment. The first is that the means chosen by the Congress would be appropriate to the simple objective of facilitating the devolution of powers in question by providing orderly procedures that would be reasonably acceptable to the officials concerned and the public.
The second proviso is that the means chosen should not violate the overriding constitutional principle of the Eeparation of powers or disturb any conceivably existing constitutional authority in the President and the Vice President.
This is perhaps the salient point that I would like to bring out in this presentation. I believe this can be accomplished by making the statute and its procedures declaratory and permissive rather than mandatory, and by keeping those procedures substantially within the executive framework.
I shall develop this later in my statement.
I realize that Congress may deem it wise to dispell any doubts of its constitutional authority to enact this type of law in advance of a judicial test, or perhaps it might wish to make the procedures to be outlined mandatory on the officials concerned, the President and the Vice President, rather than declaratory and permissive.
PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY	107
If either of those conclusions is reached by the committee,I would suggest the initiation of a simple amentlinent to clause 6 f section 1 of article 11 affirmatory of the power of Congress, precisely along (lie lines proposed by you, Mr. Chairman, in Senate Joint Resolution 133.
That proposal would be in addition to the act, of Congress lo be discussed.
Now my written statement includes an identification of at. least four objectives that should be sought, to be accomplished by this corrective legislation.
Briefly, the act should help to make clear that, in event of a Presidential inability, the Vice President does not become the President, but only an Acting President, assuming the powers and duties of the office temporarily for the duration of the Presidential inability.
I believe declaratory action to that effect by the Congress would amount to a legislative construction of the nature of the Vice President's tenure, and would servo to minimize this troublesome question which has helped to plague and frustrate the purpose of the Founding Fathers in providing- for effective continuity for the Executive power.
Senator Km...turf:a. Mr. Fowler, would you have that apply to the Vice President in the event he takes over upon the death or resignation of the President?
Mr. Fowt.r.a. I have not covered that, Mr. Chairman, because it seemed to me that was not one of the more important problems at the moment, but it, seemed to me that custom had rather established the fact that in six previous instances where a Vice President has succeeded to the powers and duties of the office, that, in fact, he became the President,.
I think that the important gap to be filled is a construction of what the precise legal situation is when the Vice President takes over because of an inability, and you still have a living, eligible President once his inability should be removed. That is the situation on which we should be very clear, that the Vice President only assumes the powers and duties of the office, not the office itself, and therefore when the inability is terminated,' the President may resume those powers.
Senator ICErAuvEa. That would not be inconsistent with the custom that has been established of the Vice President taking the oath as President?
Mr. FOWLER. Not at all.
Senator ICErauvEa. Upon the death of the President?
Mr. FOWLER. Not at all.
They are two entirely different situations.
The second objective is that. the act should provide a simple means for devolving temporarily the powers and duties of the Presidency upon the Vice President by act of public written notification by the President himself in cases where he is physically competent and willing to acknowledge his inability.
I believe this arrangement. which is included in other bills which are before the committee would take care of a great number of likely cases.
Senator KEFAUWER. Some have suggested that the President. should write the Speaker of the House of Representatives and the President pro temporo of the Senate. Others have suggested he should write the Secretary of State.
108	PRESIDE NINA L INABILITY
Do you have any feeling about to whom the letter should be written?
Mr. Fowi.mi. On page 14 under item 2 where I am describing or attempting to describe, or outlining the statutory proposal, it is suggested  that the message by the President be transmitted to the Vice President with copies to the President pro temporo of the Senate and the Speaker the I louse.
I think technically the President would tell the Vice President ho wants him to take over and make that a matter of national record by the usual practice of sending a message up to the heads of the two Houses.
The third objective of the act should be to provide a method and procedure for the determination of a Presidential inability where the President is unable or unwilling to declare his own inability.
'rho greater part of my comments and statement is directed to that most difficult aspect of tins overall problem.
Finally, the fourth objective of the act should be to provide a precise method for determining the end of the inability and the return to the President of the powers and duties of his office, after either a volunta7 or involuntary inability determination has resulted in the assumption of these duties by the -trice President.
Now I should like to turn to what I think is perhaps the most. crucial problem underlying this current situation, namely, whether Congress has in the Constitution a basis for taking helpful and corrective action without a constitutional amendment.
I believe the chairman knows that there is considerable authority other than the present witness for the proposition that in absence of any specific and well-defined constitutional provision for dealing with Congress could under the "necessary and proper' clause undertake appropriate legislative action.
I cite here Dr. Corwin s views from his classic treatise on the Office of the President, and I think he expresses the basic underlying thesis when he says :
The framers meant to provide a functioning system of government and presumably did so. At least there is no apparent reason why Congress should take a less vigorous view of its own competence than it would when It provided a method for the settlement of the Hayes-Tilden disputed election In 1877 and therefore prevented a civil war.
I have included in my, statement a reference to the considerable body of contemporary opinion that• existed at the time of the illness. of Garfield and Wilson, that action could be taken under the so-called implied powers of the "necessary and proper" clause.
I think the committee is of course aware of the fact that many contemporary scholars have gone on record similarly in the hearings before the subcommittee of the House Judiciary Committee.
I think the important thing to note here is that there is an element that is sometimes overlooked in that this "necessary and proper"" clause 18 of section A of article I endows Congress not only with the power to make all laws which shall be necessary and proper for carrying into execution the so-called granted powers to the Congress which appear in the first 18 clauses, but also, and I quote :
all other powers vested by this Constitution In the Government of the United States or In any department or officer thereof.
Now it is the latter part of this "necessary and proper" provision that attention should be directed to, and I suggest to the committee that
PRESI DENT IA I4 MARI IATY	109
it means nothing if it does not give Congress some authority to enact legislation necessary and proper for carrying into execution the Executive powers endowed in the President and the Vice President which may become ineffective because of an inability of the President.
There aro those, I think, who contend that in view of the fact that Congress in clause 6 of section 1 of article II' was specifically granted the authority to declare what officer should act as President in event of the inability of both the President and the Vice President, that the old rule applies that if a law specifies one power it thereby excludes any other power. They would suggest that this denies Congress any other authority in this area. But I do not believe that the grant of this broad and unlimited specific authority of the Congress to act in matters of Presidential succession when both the President and the Vice President are unavailable should be construed to preclude the Congress front exercising perhaps a more limited prerogative to enact necessary and proper measures designed to assist the President and the Vico President in keeping with this problem of Presidential inability.
Senator ICErAuvEn, Mr. Fowler, do you agree that article II, section 1, clause 6, referring to the power of Congress to determine who shall net upon the death, resignation, or inability of both the President and Vice President refers only to who should act on down the line of succession, and not to the immediate thing we are considering here of how you determine inability?
Mr. l'owr.En. I would so agree, Mr. Chairman.
Senator ICErAuvEn. So any right of the Congress to act would have to be under the "necessary and proper" clarse?
Mr. Fowr.iuu. Precisely.
Senator ICErAuv-sa;•I see.
Mr. FOWLER. I would suggest. that, this "necessary and proper" provision gives Congress the authority to aid or facilitate the discharge of the responsibilities lodged in other departments.
Otherwise, the express reference to the power to enact legislation necessary and proper to carry into execution all powers vested in the National Government or any officer thereof is relatively meaningless.
For over 160 years, as the committee has studied, this Nation has encountered a series of serious situations in which the problem of Presidential inability has not been met by a practical procedure or practical solution.
Today it seems reasonable that appropriate legislation to provide some such procedure to facilitate or aid in this transfer, where desirable, is necessary and proper to carry out the execution of the powers vested in the National Government, and particularly in the Executive.
Indeed, I Would suggest. that a fAilure,to take some action simply continues the risk that a situation may arise where the powers and duties of the President cannot beexecuted because of an inability,. in the absence of any appropriate or practical formula for dealing with such inability.
Now I do not want to trespass on the committee's time to elaborate and analyze many instances in which the Supreme Court has relied upon this "necessary and proper" clause in upholding congressional enactments, including instances that give orderly procedure to the operations of other coordinate power, namely, the Executive and the
22324-88-8
110	1'ItKAIDEMIAi. INAnlliITY
judicial, but I should like to suggest a couple of areas which 1 think ore analogous, where the Congress has acted.
One of the striking ones is I he various enactments that Congress has passed over the veers lo promote efficiently and integrity in the discharge of the °Mein! tint ies of all the eintnoyeea of I lie executive de-iart mentt. mud 10 provide proper discipline in the executive public service. :oat. is pursuant to no specific granted power to the Congress, and yet Congress has not hesitated historically over the years to enact a series of civil service laws anti laws designed to protect, the integrity of the pnhlir service, on the theory that il. is necessary mei proper to the functioning of the executive departments anti agencies that a high standard of conduct and probity, should he provided for.
Again the Constitution only .authorizes the Congress to specifically define anti punish erimes of pulley, felony on the high seas, and a-fenSes against. the law of nation, Ireaaslm Mt counterfeiting.
Nonetheless, because it is necessary to effectuate the overall authority of the National Government, as the Senator of course knows, we have an extensive Federal Criminal Code with hundreds of enactments set forth in title XVIII of the code, anti (he colitis have said repeatedly in cases that the authority to flew( Federal climbed laws other than hose speetheelly referred to in t he Constit at ion is necessary anti proper to an execution of the powers granted the National Government.
Another analogous situnt ion IS the power which Congress has excl.-
eised celleatelllY	make effective the operation of the Federal coin's.
An example, just to cite one, the Congress may direct the removal of a case from a State to a Federal court in a Miniml prosecution against a Federal (Aker for acts done under color of Federal law, and other examples.
Finally, psi. to cite one more, the legislation that has to do with the claims against the Government. There have been a series of enactments, as the chairman will recall, in which Congress has given special direction to the honoring of claims by various groups or citizens against the Government.
There are other examples, but I will pass on.
Aiks,mredly, care must be taken in any legislative enactment of the type referred to to assure that the means chosen ore appropriate to facilitating this devolution of the powers and duties of the President, upon the Vice President in a practical and workable manner. The method selected should avoid any arrogation of authority to determine that inability to forces or groups in a manner that would be destructive of the principle of balance of power in the Constitution.
I believe if these precautions were observed, they should place the legislative enactment beyond substantial risk of successful challenge on constitutional grounds.
Of course anybody could brings case and undoubtedly there would be one in the future regardless of how insubstantial the claim might be, but. in my opinion, with the type'of enactment to be outlined, such a challenge will not be successfnl.
Senator KMAIIVER. Mr. Fowler, on that point, quite a number of witnesses, such as Mr. Taylor and, r understand, the Atterney General before the House Committee—Mr. Taylor representing a committee of the New York State Bar Association—have stated that while it might be possible that a statute would take care of the situation, that it should not be left to statutory enactment for two reasons.
PRYSIDENTIAL INAMMTY
First, there is the feet, as you say, that a suit. would be brought and I he ads of the Acting President, particularly its the event some dispute might arise between the acting President and the President who has been deelared to be unnhle, might he questioned, and litigation and confusion would result.
Yon would IRA know until after a case reached the Supreme Court whether he had acted constitut Tonally or not.
Secondly, that this is such an important matter that, even conceding [he legality of a slat utory enactment, it is smnething flint people themselves might to decide upon by way of a const it id lone' amendment.
Do you think there is much validity to those arguments?
Mr. Fowi,En. 1 have reflected on that position considerably, Ali.. Chairman, and 1 have tried to put my own position here as clearly Its I MIK
really boils down tothis. I do not believe the Constitution should Ise changed for frivolous reasons. If we did so, we. would sooner or Inter end up with a very cumbersome and unworkable document. I believe it was the intention of the Founding Feathers, and that, is the great genius of the Constitution, that it is phrased for the most part. in general terms, thereby giving us a certain flexibility to its operation and adaptability to new comfit ions and sit tint ions.
I think, for example, it would be very unwise for the Congress to initiate an amendalmy process through some proposal that would burden the CO10411(111 ion wets detailed and rigid description of the means and methods to be utilized in handling the inability problem.
That would not only encumber the Constitution, but would tend to freeze the precedure into a form that might prove impractical in some later situation.
However, I would certainly have no substantial objection to accompanying the legislat re enactment proposed by a simple constitutional ffi
amendment armalory of the powers of Congress along the lines you propose, or at least a resolution introduced by the chairman of this committee, that is S. J. Res. 133.
Senator krumtivEn. J list affirming that Congress should have the power to deal with this problem by statute.
Mr. Fowt.ea. Yes. I recognize that. the Congress may, conclude after further analysis of the legal and constitutional considerations concerning the authority of the Congress to act that there is a substantial doubt there. There are differences of opinion on it. Or it might feel that it is better policy to move for an affirmatory constitutional amendment rather than wait for the action to be challenged because of the reasons the chairman has suggested.
Or it might wish that the procedures that are proposed here as declaratory and permissive be made mandatory on the President and the Vice President.
' In any of thoseeventnalities, it should certainly initiate the amendatory process.
I have only one more point to make on this constitutional problem, and that is to point out what the committee is fully aware of.
There are some whO contend that the Constitution already by implication has given the final authority to act. as judge of the President's inability to the Vice President, by providing that. he should take over the duties of the office. There is the implication that he should be the final authority to determine the inability, and accord-
112	PRESIDENTIAL INAIDDITY
ingly it Is urged that the Vice President's implied authority could not be constitutionally divested without some constitutional amendment. I believe there is both a practical and a legal answer to this content ion.
The practical answer is that the Vice Presidents themselves have never adopted this theory, and they are not likely to in the future. It would be certain that the exercise of any such prerogative by the Vico President solely, without any assistance from nny other procedure, would undoubtedly envelop the administration of the Executive Office in a cloud of controversy and debate, and his effectiveness would be diminished and the country would suffer.
Now for the legal answer, there are two parts for the legal answer. The first is that the Constitution does not provide in express terms that the Vice President has the solo authority to determine an inability, and I do not believe it is likely that the members of the Constitutional Convention would have reliea upon sonic so-called rule of law tint in contingent grants of power the one to whom the power is granted is to decide when the emergency has arisen.
I do not. believe they would have relied on that doctrine in such n highly important and significant matter as the transfer of the powers and antics of the Presidency from one elected to his next in line.
The second part of the legal answer is that the procedure established by legislation can be, as I have mentioned earlier, declaratory and permissive rather than mandatory, by providing that the advice and recommendation on inability made available to the Vice President by the procedure establishea shall not be binding or controlling, but advisory on the Vice President.
Such a declaratory and permissive enactment would, I think, eliminate any grave constitutional question of displacing an implied constitutional power inherent in the vice presidential office.
Now so much for the constitutional argument on the power of Congress to act under the existing circumstances.
The next section of my statement is devoted to a development of some of the considerations, assuming Congress does have a residuum of authority to act. in this situation without constitutional amendment, some of the considerations that should attend the exercise of that legislative choice of means.
The chairman knows the guiding light for the exercise of legislative power, based on this necessary and roper clause, is contained in Chief justice Marshall's classic opinion in McCulloch v. Maryland.
That statement always bears repeating and I will quote it:
Let it be within the scope of the Constitution, and all Means which are ap• proprtate, which are plainly adapted to that end, which are not prohibited, but consist with the letter and spirit of the Constitution, are constitutional.
Nov what are some of these considerations?
The first as the Chief Justice's statement indicates, the method chosen should be consistent with the letter and spirit of the Constitution.
Let us suppose that the means chosen leave the authorityln making determinations of inability or the termination thereof predominately in the executive branch so as not to be destructive or impair the independence of the executive branch.
PlIEBIDENTIAL INABILITY	113
III that case I suggest they are consistent with the letter and spirit of the Constitution and its overriding principle of the separation of _powers.
Let us also suppose that the means chosen are declaratory and permissive rather than mandatory, designed to assist, rather than to compel. In that event, there can be no real (Juestion that the means aro prohibited by mum grant of power, implicit in the Constitution, to the principal officials concerned; namely, the President and the Vice President.
The second consideration is that the means chosen should be practical and plainly adapted to the end of facilitating the required action where needed.
They should encourage and make possible the ready initiation of the procedures looking to a transfer of powers in case of an inability.
In short, they must be designed to overcome the inertia which has marked previous occasions in which the country has been confronted by this problem.
Those in a position to know and understand the seriousness of the situation and its effect on the functioning of Government should be in a position to initiate the process of determination.
These include the President, when ho is physically able to make such a determination, and the Vice President, the members of the Cabinet and the Speaker of the House of Representatives and flue president pro temporo of the Senate, who incidentally are the officials named, pursuant to the Constitution, by the Presidential Succession Act as the officers upon whom the responsibility rests for maintaining effective continuity of executive authority.
By the same token, those chosen to assist in and fncilitnte the making of this determination should be, I suggest, predominantly those close to the elected leader of the people, close to him personally, politically and in the day-today dischargeof their official duties.
The inquiry into inability should be calm, friendly, sympathetic and, in no sense partisan or analogous to impeachment.
Given a procedure embodying this concept, Ivith the clear right of the President to resume his powers and duties when the inability is ended, not seriously jeopardized, the means chosen can be said to be practical and I would hope that they would be readily exercised in event of any necessity.
Now the third consideration is that the procedures instituted by legislative enactment to facilitate this very delicate transfer of authority should be politically acceptable. They have to satisfy the people, the public at large, the Nation, as to their fairness or as to the fairness and propriety of the action when taken, and thereby serve to rally the country and the various instruments of the Government behind the Acting President for the time in which he must serve.
There may be other standards and tests suggested. There is certainly room for considerable debate as to whether any given procedure properly accords with those principles.
Of a certainty, of this one thing I know the chairman will be certain, that no solution suggested is going to be acceptable to everyone. If you can get a solution that is acceptable to let's say nn 80 percent satisfaction of those ifiterested in the problem, I think a very constructive legislative achievement would have ben accomplished.
114	PRF.SIDENMAL
I him been presumptuous enough to try to outline a statutory method that is within the present. constitutional competence of the Congress and responsive to these considerations.
It of course would he an net of Congress subject. to presidential veto, and if passed, would indicate both the approval of the legislative and the executive branches.
This plan is based primarily on one originally proposed by Mr. Arthur 'Crock of the New York Times, who has studied this subject intensively and presented testimony ealing with it. to the special subcommittee of the House Judiciary Committee on April 12, 1950.
1 have taken the liberty of making some modifications in Mr. Krock's plan which have been suggested by intervening observations of a number of experts, by the constitutional question which was raised from various quarters.
There is a particular debt to some of the observations of Prof. Jim)11 E. Kaltenbach of the. department of political science of the University of Michigan. 1 do not. know Mr. Kaltenbach, but his observations appear at length in his testimony before the !louse committee and in the report of the House Jmliciary Committee on Presidential Inability dated January 31, 10501 where he submitted a response to the questionnaire from the chairman of that committee.
Now the plan in brief would be as follows: The first section would include a declaration of policy or purpose—a statement why Congress believes it is necessary and proper in advanee of the inability of the President to prescribe a practical procedure to facilitate the orderly and prompt determination of that Inability and the proper devolvement. of those duties on the Vice President, caul the circumstances and procedure for a resumption of those powers and duties.
Another section, simple in form, to which I have already referred, should provide for the devolution by the act of the President himself when he is physically able and willing to take the action that involves the transmission of a message, a written message to the Vice President. with copies to the Speaker and the President pro tempore of the Senate.
The next section should create a special body of limited function, known as the Inability Advisory Council, composed of the 11 persons named in the Presidential Succession Act. of 1918 to assure continuity of executive power in event neither the President nor Vice President is available.
As the chairman knows, these include the Speaker of the House, the President pro tempore of the Senate, and the Secretaries of State, Treasury, Defense, the Attorney General, the Postmaster (leneral, and the Secretaries of Interior, Commerce, Agriculture and Labor.
Senator REFAUVER. Somehow when the Department of Health. Education, and Welfare was established, the succession act was not amended so as to include the Secretary of that Department.
Mr. Fowls.% Yes.
Senator KEFAUVER. So you would leave that. Secretary out of this committee.
Mr. FOWLER. I have no opinion on that, Mr. Chairman.
I think it would be perfectly appropriate to amend the succession act to include the Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare as
PRE131D1.7N VAL 1NABILITY	115
part of this framework, because he does have a very important role, and I do not think it would detract frOM either the Presidential Succession Act, or this proposed Inability Advisory Council to have it so included.
The next section should treat of the situation where the President's inability concerns his physical or menial condition from a health standpoint.
In such cases it would iirovide that, upon the request of the Vice President. or any two members of the Inability Advisory Council filed with the Seeretary of State, the Secretary of State would convene the Council by due and proper notice, to consider the desirability of instituting a formal determination of the inability.
Upon affirmative vote of a majority of the Council in a meeting called for this purpose, the Surgeon General of the Public Health Service should designate a medical panel of five leaders of the medical profession, from the heads of the medical departments of volunteer hospitals. After an examination of the facts and the submission of a report by the medical panel, the Inability Advisory Council, by a majority finding, is empowered to declare the inability of the President. to discharge the powers and duties of his office, and to advise the Vice President in writing, recommending that he should forthwith assume the powers and duties of the President, provided that nothing in this section shall make the advice and recommendation binding or controlling on the Vice President.
The findings of the medical panel shall be advisory only and not binding on the Inability Advisory Council, but a copy of the report of the findings of the panel, together with a copy of the report of the Inability Advisory Council, shall ha made nblic at the time the Council shall make a formal report to the Vice President of the inability of the President.
A subsection should also provide that the Council, at a meeting called for the purpose, at the written request of the President, or any.member of the Council, may determine, by.a majority finding, that the inability of the President is at an end, provided that nothing in this section shall make the advice and recommendation of the Council binding and controlling on the President.
Ire may follow this procedure, in other words, if he so wills. He may assert that he is able and this act would not in and of itself prevent him from resuming his office.
The next section should provide a procedure for the operation of the Council where the Presidential disability is due to reasons other than health. That would dispense with the requirement for consultation with the medical panel and the publication of a report containing the findings of any medical panel which would be academic under those circumstances.
Finally, in such legislation,.it would seem to me to be desirable to provide some modus operandi for the devolution and the powers of the office pursuant to the terms• of the Presidential Succession Act when because of war or hostile enemy attack, such as might occur in ease the Capitol should be subjected to an atomic bomb, the President, the Vice President and a number of members of the Council would be not available for action.
I have no suggestion as to the form of a provision that this provision should take for this extraordinary and unusual emergency, but I
110	eitmi NTIAL INAMIATY
would suggest that ono might be developed with the advice of tho Director of Defense btobilizat ion In the light of plans of that aka for the maintenance of government and public authority in the cnso of enemy attack.
There are both pmblems of communication and succession involved there, and I do not. think I have tho knowledge and am suillciently in touch with the situation to suggest a practical answer.
Mr. Chairman, that concludes my statement. I am again deeply honored end appreciative of the opportunity to appear before the Committee.
(Mr. Fowler's statement is as follows:)
STATEMENT OF HENRY 11. FOWLER IIKLATINO TO PRESIDENTIAL
INABILITY laxnutsvtos
Mr. Chairman and gentlemen of the committee, my name is Henry 11. Fowler. I ant a practicing attorney with the firm of Fowler, heva, Hawes & Symington, 1701 K Street NW., Washington, D. O.
I am very much honored to be hero as a witness before this subcommittee to participate in your deliberations on the very important and complicated question of Presidential inabliity
T. CORREOTITS IXOISLATION AT TIIts SESSION IS CONSTITUTIONALLY YEARIBLE
Any ritstund of the historical background and nnalysis of the many issues of law and sinteeraft surrounding this topic would be repetitious and presumptuous in view of the availability to the committee of many scholarly studies nod comments. If I can be of any help to this subcommittee this morning, it would be by endeavoring to present a specific and conerete point of view that promises a prompt and practical treatment of the problem. Accordingly, that will be my purpose.
I my opinion it Is legal, practical, and desirable for the Congress, by leglaia-tire enactment at this session to facilitate the orderly devolution upon the Vice President of the powers and duties of the President in the event of the President's inability to discharge them and their resumption by the President upon a passing of his inability.
No constitutional amendment should be necessary in view of the very general language In the inability clause of the Constitution (cinuse 0 of section 1 Of article II) omitting any specific method for initiating and determining nn inability finding, and the availability of the so-called necessary and proper clause (clause 1, section 8, article I). There art two provisos to this statement. The first is that the means chosen by the Congress be appropriate to the objective of facilitating the devolution of the powers In question by providing orderly proce•Inres reasonably acceptable to the public and the officials involved for assisting in determining the inability of the President, the assumption of his duties by the Vice President, and their resumptiont+y,the President. The second proviso is that the means chosen should not violate the overriding constitutional principle of separation of powers or disturb any conceivably existing constitutional authority. This can be accomplished by making the statute and its procedures declaratory and permissive, rather than mandatory, and by keeping the procedures substantially within the executive framework.
Perhaps, the Congress may deem it wise to dispel any doubts of its constitutional authority to enact this type of law in advance of a judicial test when action is taken pursuant to it, or, perhaps, it may wish to make the procedures prescribed mandatory on the principal officials concerned (the President and Vice President). rather than declaratory and permissive. If either of these eon-elusions is reached, I would susegstoinstion of a simple amendment to clause 6 of section 1 of article II affirmatory of the power of Congress, along the lines proposed by the chairman of this committee In Senate Joint Resolution 133, in addition to the act of Congress to be &sem tsed.
U. SOME MAJOR OBJECTITES OF °emotive LEGISLATION
At the outset. It would be well to Identify, some of the major objectives of corrective legislation:
P141::SIDENTIAls INnitlraTY	117
(o) The net Phould help to make clear that, hi event of a Peek!dentist "Inability," the Vice President does not become the President, hilt only an acting President, assuming the powers end duties of the Office only temporarily for the
duration of ,the Prenitlentini	action by the Congress would
amount to a legislative construction of the nature of the Vice Pre,tWenn; tenure,
In ease of a Presidential	It piloted Serve to minimize this trouble-
Nome question that lum helped to plague and frustrate the purpose of the Found-Ing /Where in providing fur effective continuity for the Executive power when the President is tumble to Mitchel-go it.
(h) The net should provide n Allman nietum for devolving tetnporarlly the powers and duties of the Presidency upon the Vito President by act of public written notillention by Om President himself In casem where ho Is phynically comPetclit and willing to acknowledge his "nodality." This arrangement undoubtedly would take care of n Brent number of the likely cages.
(e) The net Omuta provide n method and procedure for the determination of
Proddealiel "Inability" where the Prealtroit le unable or UDWIllIng to declare his own "InnbIlity." The granter part of lay comments will be devoted to this most difficult aspect of the overall problem.
(4) The net should provide n precise method for determining the end of en "Ititibility" end the return to the l'reeldent of the powers and author of his (Mks., after either a voluntary or involuntary determlnetien of an "inability" IMO resulted In the assumption of those powers and duties by the Vice President. III. THE MAIM: Os' TIFE OONNTITUTIONA/, IMOD. IEOD A(FTION nY OONOREFIN WITHOUT
AWAITINO OONATITUTIONA1. AMENDMENT
There le a consIderribin respectoble authority for the proposition dint in tho 'dower of any specific and welhilefined emoditutionfil provision for defiling with the "Inability" problem, Congress under the "necetwary end proper" chum of Ilse Conetitution (clause 18, sec. 8, art. I) may undertake appropriate
leglain-tive fiction. In urging this view, Dr. Kiwnrd f4. Cerwiti, one of our outstanding conetitutionni authorities, In his book, The President: Office aria Powers, had this to nay:
"The framers meant to provide a functioning system of government and pro-numnbly did so. At least there is no apparent reason why Congress should take n teem vigorous view of Its own competence than it would when It provided a method for the settlement of the Hayes-Tilden disputed election In 1877 and therefore prevented ft Civil War." (See 1057, ed. p.55)•
In limes of previous discussion prompted by tire illness of Onrfleld and WI!-Firm, there was coneidernhie opinion to the effect that this (armee embodying the so•entled Implifst powers gives Congress power to Implement the "Inability" clause mince this Is n power necessary end proper to make effective the Executive power and guarantee that It shell not become dormant'
Many contenipernry legal scholars have also gone on record to thin effect, as reflected In the hearings before the tothernomitteo of the Mime Judielnry Corn-mitten and in the report of January 31, 1950, setting forth responses to a gees-tionnnire.
It should he noted that clause 18 of section Rot article I endows Concrete with the power "to make nil laws which abet! he necessary and proper for carrying into Execution the foregoing Powers and all other Powers vested hl/ this Constitution in the Government of the Untied Mates, or in any Department or ()Meer thereof." Melte minpited.] The latter part of this provision means nothing If It does not rive Congress some authority to enact legislation necessary and proper for carrying Into execution (In addition to the express powers of Conerees set forth In preceding 17 anuses of see. 8), "all other powers" vested by this Constitution in the Oevernrnent of the United States or any "Officer" thereof.
'See Ruth C. Silva In her article. "Presidential Sneeession and Disability." 1n Law and pontempoary Problems. Doke University School of lAw fantnmn 1056-. at footnote 64. rhero she otiriblites this view to the followinr: 2 John Randolph Tucker. Constitution of the United States. 713 (1599) : Cooler. Presidential Inshilits 135. North Aro•rie•n Review. (1841) at 425-427: Curtis, Presidential Inability. 25 Harney, Weeklr at 8:11 and 1153: Jodee Samuel Sheliabareer and Goy. John Davie Lout quoted In the New York Herald. September 5. 1851. p. it, cola. 1 and 2: former Attorney (leneral A. Sehoonmaker. Jr., of New York, minted In New York Herald. September 17. 15.51. p. 01. cols. 1-2: Cott. gresaman George Robeson. New York Tribune. Sontomhor 2. 1881. p. N. COI. : rorre.r Vice Proddent Schuyler CoTfoi, New York Tribune. September 8, 1881. p. 5. eel. 3; Reprerentsttre Clifton N. McArthur, Ifearfrgs before Committee on the Judiciary so If. It. 12809, 12829, 12849, and H. J. Res. 297. 66th Cong. 2d gets. (1029), at 33.
118	PRESIDENTIAL 1NAtnlir1'y
There are those who contend that, in view of the fact that the only power specifically granted to Congress in clause 0 of section 1 of article II is to declare what
officer 111:;:.i EIVE as President in rase of money or inability in both the Presi-
dew,. and Vice Presidency, the rule of ldelusio ileitis, excited() atterlus" denies t:ongress any other authority in this area. This grant of broad and unlimited
specific nuthority to the Congress to dent with presidential succession fn case
of the unavailability of both the President and the Vice President should not be construed to preclude Congress from exercising its more limited prerogative
In ennet necessary and proper measures, for example, designed to assist the President and Wee President In coping with the problem of Presidential "Innbility."
This "necessary and proper" provision gives Congress authority to aid or facilitate the discharge of the responsibilities lodged in other departments. Otherwise, the express reference to the power to enact legislation necessary and proper to carry Into execution all powers vested in the National government or Any "Ofneer" thereof is relatively meaningless. For over 100 years the Nation has enemmtered a series of serious siltintions of practical Presidential "inability" without the developmeut of nn effective procedure by the Hxecutive for devolving the provers mei duties of the Presidency temporarily upon the Vice President. Today, it seems reasonable that appropriate legislation to provide sonic procedure to (militate this transfer where desirable is necessary and proper to carry into execution all powers vested in the National government. Indeed, n failure to take sonic action continues the risk that n situation may arise where the powers mid duties of the President cannot be executed because of nn "Inability" mitt the absence of any appropriate tied practical formula for dealing with it.
I shall not trespass upon the committee's time to elaborate end analyze the rimy- instances in which the Supreme Court has relied upon this "necessary and proper" clause in upholding congressional enactments, including instances that give orderly procedure to the operations of other coordinate powers, namely, the executive anti the judicial.
Assuredly, care must be taken In any legislative enactment of the type referred to to assure that the means chosen are appropriate to assisting or facilitating a devolution of the powers anti duties of the President upon the Vice President Inn practical and worknbte manner. The method selected should avoid any arrogation of authority to determine the Inability and the transfer of authority to forces that would be destructive of the delicate balance of power embodied as an overriding principle in the Constitution. These precautions, if observed, should serve to place the legislative enactment humid substantial risk of suc-ivssful challenge on constitutional grounds.
Some mention should also be made at Mk 'whit of the contention, sometimes advance'!, that the Constitution has already WWII by implleation the authority to act as Judge of the President's "Inability" to the N'tee President. Accordingly it is urged that the Vice Prestolent (lath! not constitutionally Im divested of this power Without a eonst Rut lonal amendment.
There is a practical ;mil a legal answer to this contention. The practical answer Is that Vice Presidents themselves'have never adopted this theory and are not likely to lit the future. Also, it is quite likely that the exercise of such a prerogaiive by a Vice President would envelop the administration of the Office in a cloud of controversy and debate. Ills effectiveness would lie diminished and the riatIltry would suffer.
The legal answer is in two parts: The first Is that the Constitution does not so provide In express or implied terms. it is not likely that the footnnoting Fathers would have relied upon the so-called rule of law that in contingent grants of power the one to whom the power is granted Is to decide when the emergency has arisen, in such a highly iniportnnt and signilleant matter as the transfer of the powers and duties of the Presidency from one elected to his next-in-line. The sisend part of the legal answer is that the procedure established by legislation can be declaratory and permissive, rather than mandatory. By providing that the advice and recommendation on "inability" made available to the Vice President by the procedure established shall not be binding or con-
trolling hut advisory to the Vice	sident, any grave constitutional question of displacing an Implied constitutional power inherent in his Office can be avoided. So much for the existing constitutional power of Congress and the argument that Congress is without present authority to pass a law designed to facilitate the devolution of Presidential powers to the Vice President in an orderly and appropriate fashion.
We come now to the related question of whether or not a constitutional amendment is necessary or desirable to enable Congress to act. Some of the
PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY	119
reasons why n constitutional amendment 14 not memory have 1-cen indicated. Congress should deal promptly with this problem by a legislative enactmeet. Its vonstitutional nuthority to act along cerium lines seems sufficiently. clear. ActIon need not be further delayed because of the desire of sone. to establish the constitutionnl nuthority to lintulle the problem beyond any possible doubt.
While, ne indicated above, It Is not my view that rI emettittithmal nmemintent is necessary, It does not follow thnt an affirmatorY effort to mend the ( %rind-tut Ion on this score Is undesirable.
The Constitution should not be changed for frivolous causes. 11 would be unwise for the Congress to initiate the amendatory process through some proposal thnt woubi burden the Constitution with a detailed aml rigid description ef the means and method to be atIlized in handling the inability problem. This eottrse might tend to freeze the procedure into a form that might prove linprac-Heal in the future.
However, there should be no substantini objection to accompanying the legislative enactment proposed by a simple constitutional nmenffinent animator) of the power of Congress niong the Mies proposed by the chairman of tills com• miner In Semite Joint Resolution 133.
The committee may conclude after further analysis of the legit! nod contain,-aimed considerations concerning the nuthority of Congress to net in an appre-priate manner that there Is a substnntial doubt. Or It may feel that It is better policy to move for tut aflirmatory constitutional amendment rather 1111111 wait for action pursunnt to its legislative enactment to be challenged in the courts. (Jr II timy wish to make the procedures mandatory. In these
evc•nlu-
aIllies It should redid:ay initiate the amendatory process.
Iv. some CONSIDERATIONS WHICH SHOWED ATTEND IIIE LEGISLATIVE CHOICE OF MIKA NS OR PROCEDURES IN TREATINO ME "INABILITY" PR.OGRAli
The guiding light for any exercise of legislative power, based on the necessary and proper clause, is contained in Chief Justice Marshall's classic opinion In McCulloch v. Maryland (4 Wheat. I10 (1810) ) where he wrote:
"Let It be within the scope of the Constitution, and nil means which are appropriate, which are plainly adapted to that end, which are not prohibited, but consist with the letter and spirit of the Constitution, are Constitutional" (p.421).
What are some of the major considerations which should affect the congressional choice of appropriate means in this situation in keeping with the spirit of Marshall's statement?
First, the means chosen should be consistent with the letter and Spirit of the Constitution. Let us suppose that the means chosen leave the authority in making determinations as to Presidential Inability or the termination thereof predominantly in the executive branch so as not to be destructive of the Independence of the executive. In that ease they are consistent with the letter and spirit of the Constitution and its overriding principle of the separation of powers. Let us suppost also that the means chosen to facilitate the devolution of the powers and duties of the President upon the Vice President In event of a Presidential inability and their orderly resumption upon a determination that the inability has passed, are declaratory and permissive rather than mandatory, designed to assist rather than compel. In that event, there can be no real question that these means are prohibited by some groat of power, implicit in the Constitution, to the principal officials concerned, namely, the President and Vice President. Second, the means chosen should be practical so ns to be plainly adapted to the end of facilitating the required action where needed. They should encourage and make possible the ready initiation of procedures looking to a transfer of powers and duties when the executive authority cannot be fully and effectively exercised because of a Presidential Inability. In short, they must be designed to overcome the Inertia which has marked previous occasions. Those In a position to know and understand the seriousness of the situation and its effect on the functioning of government should be in a position to initiate the process of determination. These include the President, when he Is physically able to make such a determination, and the Vice President, members of the Cabinet and the Speaker of the House of Representatives and President pro tempore of the Senate, I. e., those who are named, pursuant to the Constitution, by the Presidential Succession Act us officers upon whom the responsibility rests for maintaining effective continuity of executive authority.
By the same token, those chosen to assist in and facilitate the making of a determination of inability or the end thereof should be predominantly those close
120	PREStDENTIAT, INABILITY
to the elected leader of the people personally, politically and In the dayto•day discharge of their official duties. The inquiry should he calm, friendly, sympa-thetie and, in no sense partisan or analogous to impeachment. Given a procedure, embodying this concept, with the clear right of the President to resume his powers and duties when the ',-ability Is ended, not seriously jeopardised, the menus chosen can be said to tee pratiteal.
Third, the procedures instituted by legislative enactment to facilitate Me delicate transfer of authority should be politically acceptable. They should satisfy the people and public opinion as to the fairness and propriety of the action and, thereby, rally the country behind their new acting president for the time he must serve.
Perhal-s other standards or tests may ho considered. Also there may be room for considerable debate as to wheLler n given procedure properly accords with these emedderations. Of a certainty no precise solution aecephible to everyone can be devised. Nonetheless, I have been presumptuous enough to try to develop an outline of a statutory method, within the present constitutional coin-petence of the Congress and responsive to the foregoing considerations. It would be provided by an net of Congress, subject, of course, to the usual Prost-dentint veto so that, in event of Presidential approval the procedure described would have the backing of both legislative and executive branches.
This plan is based primarily on one originally proposed by Mr. Arthur Krock of the New York Times, who has studied this topic intensively and presented testimony dealing with it to the Special Subcommittee of the House Judiciary Committee on Presidential Innbility on April 12, 1050 (see hearings before Special Subeommittee to Study Presidential Inability of the Committee on the judiciary, lionse of Itepresente t Ives, p. 01 et seq.)
I have taken the liberty of 'milking some minor modlilentiona In his plan suggested by intervening observations of n number of experts, with n particular debt to sonic of the observations of Prof. Jose: it N. Kaltenbach of tho Depert-mod of Political Science of the University of Michigan. I have not had the pleasure of meeting him but his observations appear nt length In the testimony before the Rouse eoneniftee and in the report of the House Judiciary Committee on Presidential luability dated January 31, 1050.
V. OUTLINE OF PROPOSED PLAN
The teen suggested for your consideration would Include the following provisions
(1) A declaration of policy or purpose—a statement of the reasons why it Is noes itY and proper, in advance of the inability of the President to discharge the powers and duties of his office, to prescribe a practical procedure to facilitate the orderly and prompt determination of that inability and the proper devolvement of those duties on the Vice President, as provided in clause 8 of section 1 of article II of the Constitution, and the circumstances and procedure for a resumption of those towers and duties by the President.
(2) A section simple In form providing that upon the transmission by the President of a message to the Vice President with copies to the President Pro Tempore of the Senate anti the Speaker of the House stating his inability to discharge the powers and duties of his office, the same shall devolve on the Vice President, until the transmission by the President of a message to the same parties stating his resumption of the powers and duties of his office.
(3) A section creating a special body of limited function, known as the "Inability Advisory Council," composed of the eleven persons named In the Presidential Succession Act of INS to assure continuity of executive power in 'vent neither the President nor Vice President is available (3 USCA sec. 10). Thsse include the Speaker of the Rouse of Representatives, the President pro tempore of the Senate and the Secretaries of State, Treasury, Defense, The Attorney General, the Postmaster General anti the Secretaries of the Interior, Commerce, Agriculture, and Labor.
(4) The next section should treat of the situation where the question of the President's inability concerns his physical or mental condition from a health standpoint. In such cases it would provide that, upon the request of the Vice President or any two members of the Inability Advisory Council filed with the Secretary of State, he (the Secretary of State) shall convene the Council by due and proper notice, to consider the desirability of instituting a formal determination of the inability of the President. Upon an affirmative vote of a majority of the Council in a meeting called for this purpose, the Surgeon General of the
PitKESIDENTIAI. INAHIbITY	121
Public Health Hervice shall designate a medical panel of five leaders of the medical profession, froln the heads of the medicol departments of voluntary hospitals. After an examination of the facts and the submission of a report by the medical panel, the Inability Advisory Council, by a majority finding, Is empowered to declare the Inability of the ',remittent to discharge the powers and duties of his office and to advise the Vico President in writing, recommending that he should forthwith assume the powers and duties of the President, provided that nothing in thin section shall make the advice and recommendation bind-Ing or controlling on the Vice President. 'rho findings of the medical panel shall be advisory only and not binding on the Inability Advisory Council but a copy of the report of the findings of the panel, together with a report of tbo !nobility Advisory Council shall bo made public lit any limo the Council shall make n formel report to the Vice President of the Inability of the President. A subsection should also provide that the Council nt a meeting called for that purpose nt thin written request of the President or any member of the Council may deter. mine, by a minority finding, Hist the Inability of the President is at nn end, pro-skied that nothing In this 'teeth's' shall make the advice rind recommendation of the Council binding and controlling on the President.
(6) A further section should provide a procedure for the operation of the inability Advisory Council where the Presidential disability Is due to reasons other Hum health, dispensing with the requirement for the consultation of the medical panel and the publication of a report containing the findings of that panel.
(6) An ndilitionnl section should provide a minim; operand! for the devolvement of the powers and duties of the Office of the President pursuant to the terms of the Presidential Huccession Act when because of war or hostile enemy attack, such as might occur In case the Capital should be subjected to atomic bombing, the President, the Vice President, and a number of members of the Inability Advisory Council would be killed or wounded. The provision for this extraordinary and unusual emergency should be developed with the advice of the Director of Defense Mobilisation in the light of the plans of that OilIce for the maintenance of (Inv-ernment and public authority In the ease of enemy attack by atomic bombing, since both problems of communication and succession are involved.
Senator ICErauvEit. Mr. leowlei., one question. If the present law is as you have stated, that the Vice President has no legal right to de,.ide on his own to determine the matter of inability of the President, and to take over in that. case, how would this declaratory and permissive statute strengthen his position ?
Mr. leowt.v.a. Mr. Chairman, I believe Tou misunderstood me. I (lid not mean to imply that the Vice President is without authority under the Constitution. My comments went, to the practical fact of history.
Senator ICErAuvEn, Yes.
Mr. Amu. That in previous instances he, the occupant of that office, has been unwilling to exorcise any such power if it exists, or to assert that he has the authority. I think that his reluctance has been probably for factual or practical reasons for fear that he might be thought to be a usurper or for fear that his action would be considered improper and disloyal; that these considerations have held back th© Vice Presidents who have been in this situation from acting.
The whole purpose of this particular procedure proposed here would be to provide an arrangement or a procedure where the advice and recommendation of such 'a. body along the lines indicated here would fortify the Vice President and indeed make it clear that the responsible officials of Government deemed it his duty to assert the inability.
I think as a practical matter with this procedure available, it would be much morelikely that in event of any, future situation, a Vice President. would assert his authority. The act as proposed here, if
122	PitgaIDENirtA1, INAnIfirrY
it is kept in &via ratory and permissive for would .not collide with any existing implied authority in the Constitution today, but it would body up and buoy up and support and make praet lent the exercise of that authority.
on tho (Ahoy hand, Congress should desire to make this pro• eedure mandatory, and make 1110 determination of the Inability Conn• eel not advisory out thud, 1 would suggest. under those eircumstances that a must but ional amendment along the lines suggested by you, simply Mill-met ory, would lie in order.
Senator Krpm.vith, As I floor:dam the advisory part, it would retpiire the aequiescenee both of the Vice President and of the President.
Mr. ItsowLEIL Well, in a case where the	was a mat tor of
health or mental condition, it would not require the awn,. of the President, Upon the vole of the majority of the Inability Advisory Conned, they would reeommend to the Vice President that he ntminne thepowera and dutictsof the (Ave.
Now it is always possible that for masons that exist at the time, a given Nike President might refit v to ammo those powers and ditties, despite the availability or Ow existenee of this advice and recommendation.
Commentators considered that. possibility and there has been discus-shin of whether a writ of mandamus should he issued. I. think under those ciremustances, where the Vice President is unwilling, &Tito this kind of a finding and determination, actually there is little recourse (hat the country con lmve.
Some have suggested that under those eirctimstunms impeachment proeeeding,s might be proper because of a failure of the Vice Pmksi - dent to assvrt or to carry out what are the duties of his ollice, but. except for that possibility of impeachment proceedings, I would think that (hero would be no way in which you can force a man to assume the powers and duties of the otlice in such a sit net ion.
Senator KErmivEll. And then likewise there would be no way you could force the old President back in upon a finding that inability had terminated.
Nfr. FowLEIL If he did not want to serve.
Senator KErAtIvrit. Unless he wanted to serve.
Mr. FowLEn._That is correct, sir.
Senator KErAtivEa. Mr. Fowler, you have given us a statement that reflects a great deal of thought and study and background. It is a scholarly presentation. I know it. will certainly be considered a sub-stantialand a worthwhile contribution to the thinking on this subject. and we are very grateful to you.
Mr. Fon-LEn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator KErAluvEa. Mr. Smithey, do you have any questions to ask?
Mr. Sxttrizr.Y. I have just a couple of questions, Senator.
You touched on one briefly in your remarks just now.
Does not. any statutory solution, Mr. Fowler, carry with it some legal uncertainty as to the ability of a recovered President to reassume the duties of the Presidency?
Mr. FowLza. It does carry some uncertainty. The passage of an act along the lines indicated, here and also suggested by, I believe,
PREKIDMIIM. INAIIILITY	123
S011titOt•lylie in 0110 of fire sections Of his SIIggeJ41011 would 11/11011III to a legislative eons( met ion of what the (7onst it id ion means when there
is a Presidential inability.	. ,
Now, in the past, there have been several instances where congres-sionel acts amounting to legislative constriction have set. at, rest the questions of this sort.
Actually, I think in the First. ClOngress there was an act passed construing the Constitution to give the l'resident the power to remove persons appointed to office by him and that took care of that problem for a long lime, until we got into the quest ion of the mixed legislative and Mem( ire agencies.
It. wouhl art complete 61, settle with any finality that constiilltiOnal question, but I believe for all practical purposes this legislative con-8( ruction by the Congress would clear it up.
I believe in the 20th nmenilment and also in the Presidential Succession Act, this concept of a transfer of the powers and did ies of the office rather than the office itself has been the subject, of both constitutional enactment. and legislative enactment. I think that it. is a very insubstantinl risk in the terms of the present situation.
Mr. 83irriir.y. Is there not a further weakness in the statutory ap-proaeli, in that any test of the legality of that n1)111.0110, would Nene at t he most inopportune time I
Mr. PowLsit. That is true, and I have referred to that. I think it would come at en inopportune thin.) although I would personally think it would be a very unwise principle to say that. the Constitution should be amended every time Congress undertook a very important enactment, because somebody might- later challenge it, in the courts.
You would very slimily, I think, get a constitution that. would he like the Napoleonic Code. It would lose a good deal of what has made it the great Instrument it is today.
That point of view does not appeal to me, amending the Constitution because somebody is going to bring a case in the future, unless the committee and the Congress feel that this is really a substantial doubt, unless it. is a very close question in the opinion of the committee, then the kind of affirmatory constitutional amendment, that Senator Nefauver has proposed would seeril to me to be the desirable course.
Mr. Surrnsv. Isn't it true historically. that in the instances where this. Nation has experienced some Presidential inability. that Vice Presidents have hesitated to take over the office of the Presidency, and Cabinets have failed to propose that the. Vice President take over the Presidency, because they were uncertain.
Mc. leow LER. Precisely.
Mr. SMITHEY. As to Aui power of the recovered President to resume the powers and duties of the office.
Mr. Powt.sa. I believe that is the historical fact. I would also suggest that if Congress should pass this type of law, declaring in event of the inability of the President, simply .the powers and duties, if not the office, should devolve upon the VicePresident, I believe that would put the question pretty much to rest, and I would suggest that a President would not hesitate under those circumstances, and his Cabinet would not hesitate to arrange for an orderly transfer of the powers and ditties because of this vague fear that once there had been a de-v.;11ition, that the Vice President. would serVe out the term regardless of the recovery of the President..
124	INAIIIIATY
Mr. SMITHEY. 1)o you feel it wise in your plan to have such large representation of the members of the executive branch in making this determination, and such an imbalance between the legislative and he executive in making this determination?
Mr, F'owt,itn. In an effort to bend over backward to avoid any serious constitutional question under the doctrine of separation of powers, it seems to me that the predominant determination should be on the executive side.
My choke or my suggestion that, that be the medium used arises primarily out of regard to devise n method that avoids any suggestion that the Congress or the Court or that some other branch of Government is encroaching upon the independence of the Executive in this regard.
As a practical matter, I think there are two arguments. One, that because these men are so close to the President, that they would not he
likely, in event of his illness or incapacity, to move	to ECE0111111011d that the Vice President. take his powers and duties.
That is a matter of opinion. It seems to me that on the other side for such n serious act you want the judgment. made by people who are close personally and officially in day-to•day operation, who can see what. the Presiilent's condition is doing to the affairs of government, and yet who are very loyal and friendly to him, so that if this group of men made the recommendation or advised the Vice President, the country at large would be satisfied that the President's friends and those who were in the best position to know both about his condition and the effect it was having on the affairs of government, would have made the determination.
I point out—I am not too familiar .with it, but my understanding is—the British House of Commons has taken a step some years ago, they passed a new Regency Act, in which they selected five people who would determine when the Monarch was linable to discharge his duties. They were his spouse and four officials, who were very close, would be very close to the King or the Queen as the case might be, in their discharge of their official responsibilities, and people whose offices would tend to make them sympathetic and friendly rather than antagonistic.
Mr. SMITHEY. Just ono further question, Mr. Chairman. You will notice, Mr. Fowler, that in article II, section 1, clause 6, the language is in sequence. It speaks of death, resignation, and inability in the sumo clause so that, whatever it is that the Vice President takes at that time, he takes it in all those instances.
The precedent having been established by Vice President. Tyler and later affirmed in the succession of 6 other Vice Presidents, and on 1 occasion in Johnson's impeachment, having been confirmed by the Congre.sg, do you think that the Congress would now find itself under some difficulty in asserting that it has authority to determine that it is really the powers and duties that devolve upon the Vice President, rather than the office itself
Mr. Fowt.r.n. I do not think that presents any difficulty. It seems to me it is so clear that in the case of the death of the President, the question of whether the powers and duties are assumed or the office itself is aumed, there is no real question there.
In the case of an inability, the reference hack can certainly be in terms of construction to the powers and duties, rather than to the
'	I'
PIIEBIDENTIAL INABILITY	125
office, and if Congress declared this particular meaning, I would think that would pretty well sot the (west ion at rest.
Mr. Slummy. Thank you, Air. Chairman.
Senator 1Cmtuviat. Air. Callaghan, the legislative assistant to Senator (Mahoney is present.
Do you have any questions?
Mr. CA LI„VIIIA rt. I have no questions, Mr. Chairman.
Senator Kny,tuvit. Another question, Mr. Fowler.
You have the Committee consisting of the Vice President and the President of the Senate plus certain Cabinet, members. I am mire it is ridiculous for anyone to think seriously that the Speaker and the President pro tempore of the Senate might color their actions or thinking in matters of this kind by the fact that their action might put them one step nearer to the presidency itself, but might not they be reluctant to starve on such a committee on the basis that somebody might think that they had sonic personal or political interest?
Mr. Fowt.Ea. I wouldn't. know, I have no way of knowing what their attitude would be on that.
It does seem to nm as the chairman hag indicated, that in such a matter of this sort, that, mon who through long periods of public service have risen to flint situation, that the thought that their action in replacing a President or a Vice President temporarily would be colored ns just so remote to me that I would think that the other argument should prevail, namely, that, the Congress, with the approval of the President, leas determined in the Presidential Succession Act, that these particular officials are the ones who are responsible for maintaining a continuity of executive power, and they have already been chosen, as it wore, as tine persons with that responsibility.
In the case of the two officials mentioned, in addition to their legislative duties, and that under those circumstances it seems to me that wo avoided ie problem of a separation of powers by selecting those officials, and if we provided for the determination to be made by any other group, you might get into, at least I can see where there might be objection from the executive side.
Senator ICzynum. My anxiety would not be that they might take some action for their own benefit, but that they might lean over backward the other way to avoid any criticism that, they were enhancing their own political closeness to the presidency.
Mr. FOWLER. Mr. Chairman t in a very close case where it was just touch-and-go as to whether an inability should be determined, I would see no reason why in such a situation they could not in effect decline to servo in that kind of a case, and a majority finding of the group would be sufficient under the law for the action to occur.
And if it was a claw case and any individual did not want to be placed in a position where ho felt he might be criticized, I should not think there would be any reason for insisting that the whole panel act and vote, and they could excuse themselves or disqualify themselves in that particular situation.
That would leave the remaining 9 persons available as a majority for a vote of 6 of the remaining 9, that would be sufficient to trigger this mechanism.
Senator KEFAUVER. I know you observed in 1 of the resolutions that I have sponsored that I had the 4 leaders of Congress as mem-
4 p -
126	PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY
bets of the cinninittee along with the members of the Cabinet. What is your thinking about thrill That is the four leaders of Congress, plus the Cabinet, but not the Speaker end not the President pro Import).
Mr. FOWLER. I would not quarrel at all with that choice of persons. I think it. would still leave the predominant, control of the situation in the executive branch and not. 'tangelo the authority to make the determinations away from the executive branch, and in my opinion it would be consistent with the principle of separation of powers.
'rho only reason that. I could see against it is it could be argued by some that this is bringing the legislative branch too much into the problem.
I do not think that argument is a soumi one against including the four persons you have mentioned, and I individually could hardly subscribe to it.
I have made the other suggestion hero on the theory that Congress has already in the Presidential Succession Act defined the people who are concerned with the problem of executive continuity, and that is a useful precedent for this purpose here.
Senator ICErmivr.s. Well, we arc certainly very grateful to you, Mr. Fowler.
Mr. Fowt,r.s. Thank you, sir.
Senator KEEAUTEIL Our next witness is Prof. Edgar W. Waugh. Professor Waugh is bend of the depart» ent. of history and social sciences at. Eastern Michigan College. He has hod a long experience Rs a teacher of political science and the Constitution and has written two books dealing with this and related problems.
We are glad to have you here, Professor Waugh. Your biography as we have it will be printed in the record at this point.
(The autobiography referred to is as follows:)
Emig w. WAvot
Born Goodman. Mississippi, November 10, 1901. II.	& M. A., University of
Mb-sissippi. Further studies, Columbia University. George Washington University anti University of Michigan Law School. tins taught In public education systems of Mississippi, Texas and Michigan. At present Profts^..:-orvrf
Science, Eastern Michigan College. Member of American Federation of Teachers—AFL-CIO, American Political Science Association and Authors Guild. Democratic nominee for State Superintendent of public instruction of Michigan, 1951.
Author of two books—Heaven Speaks American (Cedar Rapids, Iowa 1939) and Second Consul: The Vice Presidency—Our Greatest Political Problem (Indianapolis and New York) 1950.
STATEMENT OF PROF. EDGAR WAUGH, DEPARTMENT OF HISTORY AND SOCIAL SCIENCES, EASTERN MICHIGAN COLLEGE
Mr. WAUGH, Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Senator ICErAtvEs. Professor Waugh, your statement in full will be
printed in the record.
Any part that you summarize or omit will be printed as if you had
read it. Now you proceed in your own way, sir.
Mr. Wauott. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I wish to state that I appreciate very much the opportunity to
present my views to this subcommittee.
Plt ES! DENTIAI, INA 11111.1T	127
I know the enormous time pressure under which yon operate, and I am going to try to make my testimony just as brief as I can.
I would like to make one correction for the record, Mr. Clutirman.
I nut not. head of the department of history and social sciences. I am professor of political science at Eastern Afichigan College. Wo have various social sciences in one defied ment.
Senator NEPA UVElt. Well, sir, you are very moile:4 to correct the record, but hero in the political life of the. Nation, we always elevate good people a lift in lid if we can.
Mr.	'thank you.
It was very kind of you, Mr. Chairman, to invite my good wife to sit. by my side, and I do not wish to inject politicid considerations, but it is most appropriate because I think in IOU she was the most enthusiastic Estes Kefauver fan in the United States.
Senator KErm,vErr. Well, 1 am very glad to hear that. I didn't know it, but seeing how intelligent and pleasant she is, I am not surprised.
Mr. IVAron. AS I proceed, Mr. Chairman, as you said, my statement will go in the record so it will not be necessary for me to repent the bulk of thestatement.
In the first place I would like to say that I fully agree. with the previous witness !hal, the Congress has power to act.
I would even go further titan the previous witness. Mr. Fowler, did. I believe, the Congress has such full power to act not only under the elastic clause as he elaborated it, but I think also we must look at the Constitution as a whole, and many times the Supreme Court has done so.
I agree with the previous witness that the subsection clause in article II, section 1, that is clause 6, where it gives Congress power to declare ivho shall act in case both the President and Vice President are disabled or removed or resigned or deceased, does not specifically give Congress the power to act on the point we are considering.
I agree to that, But I do not agree that it is without significance even on this point, because it seems to me that when we look at the Constitution, as a whole, Congress is given power in the last resort. to see that there is a President, and we must presume that the Constitution meant a President able to function. It, would be foolish to think that Congress would have the power to see that there is a President without. meaning that there is a President functioning.
So I think that is with significance as we look at the Constitution as a whole.
We notice that in article HI section 1, clause 32 now repealed by the 12th amendment, but not. without historical significance, the Congress had a responsibility. In case the electoral college failed to yield a majority for President, it was up to the House to stop in and choose from the highest 5 and then if there was a tie for runnerup which would be Vice President, it. was up to the Senate to make the choice.
In the 12th amendment which succeeds that, if the electoral college fails to yield a majority, again it is up to the House to step in and to choose a President from the highest 3, and the Senate to choose a Vice President from the highest 2. And also we get to the 20th amendment, and where we have neither a President-elect nor a Vice
123	PRESIDENTIAL 1NAI111ATY
President-elect who was qualified, again it is up to the Congress to declare by law who shall act. as PEOSId011t.
What I am saying is, if we look at the Constitution as a whole, Congress is charged with seeing that there is a President, and it must mean that It. is a President. who is active.
Now this is n strange way to start, and yet to wind up advocating a constitutional amendment. I am among those who believe that a statute would be sufficient, who believe there is constitutional power for Congress to act, but. I observe that there is n wide difference of opinion.
There are many able students of the Constitution within the Congress and without who believe that a constitutional amendment is necessary, and it is such a serious question that 1 believe the linppiest solution would be both a constitutional amendment. and a statutory approach.
I do not believe there can be a happy solution without both.
Now very briefly, I have started with the proposal made by then Attorney deneral 'Brownell and President Eisenhower, that is, with the President's endorsement, to the House Judiciary Subcommittee on Presidential Inability on April 1,1957.
Now why do I start with this/ I will be very frank.
I think we have had so many proposals and so many solutions offered that I think it is time we begin to reduce them.
I am on record as proposing a different solution, but I think it is time to reduce them.
Now my feeling is this: When the President of the United States endorses a proposition, it. does not necessarily mean that. it should go through but it does mean it. should have() weighty consideration, and when it concerns his office and his office nlone, I think it should have distinct priority of consideration. It should be considered, adopted or defeated with priority over all propositions that have been presented to the Congress.
Now-you will notice that I have made a draft, with modifications of that plan, and that I have underscored all of the places where I advocate either change or addition. Mr. Chairman, I do not pretend to be an expert. at draftsmanhip. I am pretty well satisfied with my own teaching ob and am not applying for a job in the drafting service here in Congress.
I feel pretty amateurish at it, but I felt I could do this more briefly if we followed this.
As you will notice in this draft which I have presented, section 1 is identical with section 1 of the plan presented by Mr. Brownell with the endorsement of President Eisenhower. Tfint, means it finally clears the situation that when the Vice President, takes over for n disabled President, he becomes an acting President..
In other words, what it does, it establishes the same rule—I beg your pardon. Section 1 makes it, clear that the Vice President taking over for a President. in case of death or in ease of resignation or in case of removal, becomes the President for the unexpired portion of the then current term.
It. adds nothing new except. one thing. 117 years of history since the Tyler precedent have established that the Vice President becomes President on the death of the elected Chief Executive.
PRESIDIZITIAIr INAIIIIIAITY	120
This only establishe.s the same rule in case of his resignation or in cased his removal from oMee,
It would appear sensible, because if the President dies, the Vico President becomes President.. If the President resigns, he is out for the rest of his term, There is no temporary character about it.
The same rule should be logical. If the President is removed, he is out, and therefore the same rule should apply. lint that really adds nothing now.
Of course, there are many, able scholars who believe the trainers of the Constitution did not intend that the Vice President become President, but with 117 years of history hack of us since the Tyler precedent, it. is rather late to label that as a period of constitutional error.
1 believe it would be well to settle the question for all time in a constitutional amendment.
Sect ion 2 of this draft I am submitting is exactly the same as section 2 of the proposal which Mr. Brownell.. submitted with the endorse-meld, of President. Eisenhower.
Thnt merely makes it. clear flint if the President declares in writing that he is unable to serve, then the Vice President shall exercise, shall discharge the powers and duties of the office es acting President.
'flint I think is the sense, Mr. Chairmani of virtually everyone who has testified before your committee, that in case the Vice President takes over for a disabled President, it, should be temporary and he should merely be acting President and should not, would not oust the elected Chief.
Senator KErmivEn. Professor Waugh, in considering whether you might have added something to section 2 rather than just let it stand ns submitted by the Attorney General with the approval of the President, did you think about the emoluments'? There is quite a discussion RR to whether the Vice President when acting as President should receive a higher salary, whether ho should receive the Presidential salary, whether ho should live in the White House, whether he should have the benefit of the emoluments of the office.
Mr. WAtioii, Yes. Mr. Chairman, I have added ono section providing that Congress could implement this proposed amendment by appropriate legislation, and ns to your question, the first part I would answer very definitely this is a very wealthy nation, arid we have no reason to be bothered about the extra salary. If we were a poor nation we might, but I %would say that while the Vice President is acting as President, ho is performing those very heavy burdens, and my opinion is that an act of Congress should grant him the same salary which the President receives.
I do not think in case the President is declared disabled, where he has himself declared his own inability, the Vtce President should occupy the quarters which the elected Chief occupies.
Now I believe that if a President became so disabled that he believed really that he was not going to he able to serve any more, ho would tender his resignation, and that would bring section 1 into execution.
So I believe that he should not occupy the White House quarters, but should get the salary attached to the office.
Senator KEFAIIVER. I agree with you that is a minute matter that should not be dealt with in a constitutional amendment directly.
130	pitsmf boy xrpi Ai, xA imAT y
IVAVGIL Yes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
_ Now when we come to section 3, section 3 of the proposal made by Mr. Brownell, if you will recall, and I have underscored the changes here, it said if the President does not so declare, the Vice President, if satisfied of the President's inability and upon approval in writing of a majority of—it used the expression "the heads of executive departments who are members of the President's Cabinet." Now I have struck out those terms and hove substituted a majority of the principal officers of the executive departments.
The reason for that is this. I thought in the hearings before the House subcommittee, Mr. 'Coating made a very substantial observation. lie said in substance, "You are using this term 'majority of the heads of the executive departments who are members of the President's Cabinet' ", and he said that the term "Cabinet" is unknown to our Constitut ion and virtually unknown to our laws.
In other words, he pointed out the fact that the Cabinet was a kind of expansive thing.
It can be as large as the President wants it or it can be as small, and I think we oll agree that is constitutionally Irue. The President could say today, "I want the Secretary of State and Secretary of Treasury :Ana Secretary of Defense in my Cabinet. The vest of you stay down in your offices and do your work, but I do not wont you collectively fonctioning with mo," and he would have constitutional authority to do so.
So he felt that something very indefinite was being left. there. I also think so. I think it was a valid criticism. I believe the Cabinet is the proper body to advise the Vice President.
But I do not believe that we should leave it vague and indefinite. Therefore, I have substituted the words "principal officers of the 13-Ntellt Ivo departments."
That is a term distinctly known to our Constitution. If you will recall, this term expressly appears in our Constitution, article section 2, clause 1. There it authorizes the President to require in -writing the opinion of the principal officer in each of the executive "departments. That is ]mown to our Constitution and we are told that it is really the origin of the Cabinet. President Washington sought to get the Senate to servo as an advisory council, was unsuccessful, and thereupon he looked for advice elsewhere and he read this and reasoned thus: "If ho could require the opinion in writing of the principal officers, why couldn't he require their verbal opinions in a collective cabinet ?" And that is a good part of the origin of the cabinet system.
But then using the term "principal officers of the executive departments" would alone leave it still somewhat indefinite because who are the principal officers? I suppose you would say 10. Nov with your 10 niftier executive departments, but you have 3 subdepartments, and you might say 13 then.
But I have proposed adding this:
The Congrms may by law declare which officers, numbering not less than seven among those heads of executive departments appointed by the President by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, shall for the purposes of this article be deemed to be principal officers of the executive departments.
PltEttiDI:.,NTIAL INABILITY	131
Now I think clearly that indicates the Cabinet., and that is exactly what. the Congress would do in implementing this article. I did not put in 10. We say that there are 10 major departments. The reason
did not put 10 in is this: I felt that some day the Congress and the President both might wish to carry out executive reorganization, and if they wished to carry out executive reorganization, we would not want to freeze the necessity of a minimum of 10.
I cannot conceive, though, of any executive reorganization which would reduce our major departments to less than seven.
So (hat is the purpose here. That seems to me clearly to describe what. we think of today as the Cabinet? but it does not erase the indefinite features of the same, and I believe would make the matter satisfactory.
So much for section 8.
Now section 4 is an exact repeat of section 4 of the Eisenhower-Brownell proposal:
%Whenever the President declares In writing that his inability Is terminated, the President shall forthwith discharge the powers and duties of his °Bice.
That I think is something in principle that we all agree with. That. if the President says,"I urn able to perform," it should normally be conclusive, and I think tha 
is what is involved in section 4.
Ilowover, again I think Mr. Keating in the !louse subcommitte hearings called at tent ion to a very substantial weakness.
Mr. -Keating said you might get under section 2, section 8, and section 4 a situation where some day the Vice President, with the written approval of a majority of the Cabinet, might say, "You are unable," and the next, day the President might say, "I am able," and the next day the Vice President, with the approval of a majority of the Cabinet might say "You are unable," and the next day the President would say, "I am able," and we might have a ridiculous and chaotic situation.
Mr. Chairmen, I think a chance of such is most remote, but if we are going to close the gap, we ought, not leave a gap. That is why I have suggested adding section 5 to this proposition.
Sec. 5. whenever the Congress, two-thirds of each House concurring therein, shall find that a grave crisis has arisen with regard to a ques,lon of the inability of the President to discharge the powers and duties of his office and that a prompt and satisfactory determination cannot be concluded under the provisions of sections 2, 3, and 4 of this article—
Now I pause there. Whenever they find such, certainly I cannot conceive of the Senate and House of Representatives, if that ridiculous situation were going on., of one day the President saying, "I sin able," and the next day the Vice President, with the approval of a majority of the Cabinet, saying, "You are unable." I cannot conceive, regardless of the political complexion of the Congress, of a failure to dig up that two-thirds vote to so declare.
Now why the extraordinary two-thirds majority] I believe that Congress should never interfere in this situation until the condition has gotten out of hand, even though under our present Constitution it could.
I am asking the Congress to limit its own power. That may seem very naive and optimistic to do so, but I am asking that the Congress limit its power for the good of this Nation, and the first Congress
132	Pit E-gt Ntri AL I NA
showed a very fine example when it proposed our Bill of Rights. It did eonsidernbly limit its own power, end I think hero it would be wholesome to do so.
Now then, once by a two-thirds vote of each Itouso the House and Senate have found that. under these sections a satisfactory solution cannot be concluded, then the Senate and House of Representatives "assembled end voting as one body shall forthwith proceed to make a determination of the question by majority voto"--the reason I have said by majority vote and one body is because, Mr. Chairmen, we do not want a deadlock whoa it comes to this, and if we had an extraordinary majority wo wouldget a deadlock.
But when we say "by majority vote, and both Houses voting as one body," we are not going toga n deadlock.
vote is going to go one way or it is going to go the other, and we are going to get, a definite determination.
Then:
and such a determinntiOn of the Inability of the President or Its termination, by the Senate end lions° of Iteprosenintives, shell be conclusive_
in other words, that is it--
any provisions of sections 3 and 4 of this article to the contrary notwith• standing.
Nov this limit on congressional power I believe is wholesome.
I believe it is in keeping with the spirit of the past Constitution.
As I said in the beginning, when was Congress called in? As a last, resort, if the electoral college did not give us a President, the Congress would come in. This is ns a last. resort.
Now this leaves the matter in the executive family where it should In I believe, in respect to the separation of powers. But if the executive family cannot settle its own internal problem, then I insist that it invites and deserves the intrusion of the legislative body! and I do not believe that the legislative body should ever totally atvest itself of power to intervene.
I would like to say one word, Mr. Chairman, before I conclude.
Section 6 we Can all see is simply :
The Congress shall have power to Implement the provisions of this article by appropriate legislation.
I did not use the term "enforced" though I wouldn't, object to it.
I used the term "implement" because actually sections 2, 3, and 4 are in a sense somewhat or virtually self-executing, except, for that one case where Congress would declare who are the principal officers of the departments.
I think it requires implementing more than enforcing. It requires Congress to act under section 3, and also I think it would require that Congress would have to net under section 5.
When the Senate and House of Representatives come together assembled as one body, there would have to be some legislation about its organization and procedure, so I have used the term "implement."
Section 7 is nn exact copy of section 5, I believe it is, section 5 of the Eisenhower-Brownell proposal. It is routine and self-explanatory.
Now one other word, Mr. Chairman, and I am ready to close. I am one who on record has proposed in the past the association of members of the legislative body with the Cabinet in an inability decision, but I have come to the conclusion that it, is better not to. I would
PIWIRDENTIALi INAIMATY	133
say, though, Mr. Chairman, if we aro going to include them, I rather agree with the implication of one question you presented to Mr. Fowler. I rather agree if wo aro going to include them, that it would be better not to include the Speaker or the President pro teniporo, for the eimple reason that you indicated.
The great danger is that they would be conscious that, the public might think that their close relation to Presidential duties in the Succession Act would influence their iidgment.
I believe if wo are going to include them, I would agree with the implication of your qucetion, it would be to use the leaders, say the majority end minority leaders. This I think would be a very wholesome thing.
I think, as You doubtless know, that, our good neighbors in England have established really an official standing and I believe in Canada, for the minority lender. In other words, the minority leader in the House of Commons is paid an extra salary for his services to Her Majesty's tiovernment. If wo are going to associate the Congress with it, I believe it would be wholesome to give an official recognition to the services performed by party leadership in the Congress.
But I would prefer that it be left in the Executive family, and with the Cabinet, and I will proceed very briefly to state why I believe that would be true.
The first thing I would say on that, to leave it with the Cabinet to advise, Mr. Chairman, is the simplest plan that has been proposed.
In fact, I am inclined to believe in this plan over a great many others, because it was so simple that we overlooked .it, and on a complicated problem I believe we should invite all of the simplicity that we can get.
The second thing that, I would state with regard to it, Mr. Chairman, this involves no additional machinery, of government. We live in an age when as the price for modern civilization and our security, we have to have mounting numbers of boards and commissions and agencies, and I think whenever we can solve a problem without creating a new ono, it is a very happy thing, and this does not. It leaves it with the Cabinet going on from day to day and it never becomes an inability council, unless a cased inability comes up.
A third reason, it refrains—
Senator KEFAUYEII. When you use the term "Cabinet," you are speaking of heads of the principal administrative offices/
Mr. WAUGH-. That is right, Mr. Chairman. I am glad you asked the question. I mean within that section where Congress describes which are the principal offices according to this proposal, principal officers in the departments.
Since we think of it as a Cabinet, that is why I am using the term "Cabinet,"
Su in using these heads of executive departments, the third advantage would be we would not impose on the President the psychological hazard and potential embarrassment of having an inability council hovering over him. I think to have an inability council, a special one, we are going to remind the President all the time that he has a danger of breaking down in health and breaking mentally, and he has a hard enough job. I would prefer not to do it.
In fact, I think Mr. Brownell made an excellent statement when he said we ought not to put the President constantly on trial as to his health.
134	PRI:SI IAN/PIA L INABILITY
I think the Presidency is the most magnificent contribution that the American people have made to the science of government, and we must. be very careful that nothing is done to in any way diminish the dignity of that Office.
A fourth reason I would like to mention is this: We live in an ago of earth satellites and speed may be of the very essenee. What could be more speedy] Item are the heads of the departments close to the President, close to the Vice President, since for a quarter of a century Presidents have invited their Vice Presidents to sit in the Cabinet, which is a very wholesome development, I think, and close to the problems which cluster around the White Ilouse door.
I think we could get. the most speedy decision there of any that we could get, and it could be done quietly and calmly, and without the kind of a to-do which might impair the dignity of the Office of the President.
Another reason, I believe it. would offer us the most abundant assurance against. resort to inability proceedings born of political bias.
I do not care how fair it is. If this country ever suspects thereis political bias, in an inability determination it. would dangerously disrupt the unity of the Nation. Hero then the Vico President, is regularly a member of the President's political party. All of the heads of his departments are either members of hispolitica] party or if not, they are normally in sympathy with him, so they are persons who are in political sympathy with him. They are highly fiduciary. On the record as a whole they have it record of loyalty and they would not tolerate an inability proceeding that was born of political bias.
So I think that that is a very important consideration.
Another one, briefly: It would be in keeping with our principle of separation of powers because there would be normally no intrusion of either of the other two branches into the situation. The matter would be settled within the executive family and, very important, I think, it would be settled by members of that political party with whom the American people have in a sense entrusted executive power for 4 years, and if we believe in party responsibility, I think that would be quite important.
Finally, perhaps the most. important. of all, this plan would give the President satisfaction and comfort that he is not going to be subjected to political assaults on the grounds of inability.
Now in brief, I submit. President Eisenhower has thought more about. this problem than any President—than any man in America. Three times illness sufficient to threaten his continued working capacity has attacked him. Ile undoubtedly has given it serious thought, and he has indicated that these department heads are the ones he would feel satisfied with having associated with the Vice President.
I believe that it is good. I think it is fine reasoning.
Now finally, Mr. Chairman—
Senator KEFAUVER. Professor Waugh, you are making a very fine statement, an interesting and useful one. You take all the time you wish.
Mr. WAVOH. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Now the objection has been raised to the department heads, Mr. Chairman, and a very intelligent question came from our attorney for the committee to Mr. Fowler, about whether these department heads, because of loyalty to the President or some reason would be
['HEM/DI:SIMI. INA IMATY	135
reludina to act, and we point 10 the Garfield and 1Voodrow Wilson incidents.
Mr, Chairman, I believe those incidents should be entirely dire vomited in our day, and I have three seasons for saying so:
First, as was indicated in your questioning, Mr. Attorney, with Mr. Fowler, when the Garfield and Wilson Cabinets failed to take affirmative fiction, there was serious doubt whether an attempted installation of Mr. Artlinr as the Acting President, thinking they would be doing sot or Mr. Miirshall as Acting President, might turn (mt. to be installat ion as President, and they might oust the elected (Thief. That was certainly a constitutional hazard at the tune, and no Cabinet would ‘vish to perform an net which might have the result of ousting their Chief.
In this proposal that danger is entirely and completely erased.
The Vice President becomes the Acting President, and he acts only until the President's ability is restored. So that, is gone.
Now the second reason 1 would like to state is this:
In the time of the Garfield and Wilson incidents, the Cabinet (department) heads had neither statutory nor constitutional authority or duty to make such a decision.
Now, if the Cabinet, the Garfield Cabinet or the Wilson Cabinet, had ruled the President disabled and called on the Vice President to take over, undoubtedly large elements of the population would have said, "You have, usurped a power that is not given to you by the Constitution, is not given to you by statute and your behavior is most presumptuous."
This is entirely erased. In this proposal these department, heads not only have a power. but a constitutional duty to approve in writ, ing a temporary accession of the Vice President as Acting President, if the President is disabled and he does not announce has disability. That makes, I think, a substantial difference.
The third thing and perhaps as significant as the others, in the days of the Garfield and Wilson incidents, Mr. Chairman, this country had ocean barriers in which we trusted. In both those cases we felt an enormous degree of smug security because of our geographic position across the oceans. No Cabinet in the Garfield days or the Wilson days would feel that our national security was seriously jeopardized by a failure to bring the Vice President in as Acting President.
But every one of us knows that day is gone, and the Cabinet. knows it. This Congress has considered so many measures of national se-eurity that it, would be idle for me to say. Mr. Chairman, why it is recognized that day is gone, and any Cabinet. knows it is gone.
All department heads today know that with the President as not only the defender of American security but the defender of free men everywhere in the world, if the President is disabled and unable to act at all, serious jeopardy to our national security is threatened. Can you imagine any Cabinet, any department heads. with the Secretary of State, with the enormous responsibilities for the foreign relations of our country and with the Secretary of Defense with an enormous responsibility for the military security of this country, can you imagine that they would shield a disabled President, knowing that it jeopardized the security of the country?
I think we ought to give the Cabinet credit today for knowing that we live in an atomic age. I think this would be true but, I think
'At
13(I	pit+IsIDENvpiAT, INA!lilirry
Nvitli the 1101)110111okt hontig itilyisj nu Ills' Fire PrpSidillit we would never get the hisiallat hitt of a Vice President i4 Adieu Premithmt,
miless you lied 1 he simolieneous occuriviice of two things:
First, Executive power so inactivated lay the l'rosident's IonbiIity
to act.	Executive power simply was not functioning with any degree of satisfaction, anti, second, a stele of public alfeirs, it situation in public affairs that made it very serious for him not to act,
and I think with the Office of President we should never undertake, without I, voluutury &viand ion IT the ph,„4,10,11, hi huh null he is
disabled unless the wed is iiittioriit
I thank you very much, NIP. Chairman. I shall conclude my state.
mold.
$011ntOr KEFAVVElt. Professor Weugh, we are very grateful to you.
(Professor Watigh's statement is es follows:)
t.t.tx FOR A Vt)NATtTUTIONAti MU:NUM:tit WITH it FARM) TO PliENIDENTIAL AMI ITT, PRTPAREO nY EIKIAR W. Wmaiii. Pitorrsson or Pau ticm, Hcir.str., EAsivg:4 MItIIOIAN comrur, ItAtiEn 111.0N TI(I EISEN MATER-MOM NELL PRO. FOSA1, WITI1 CHANGES AND AIMITIGNM ITALiCtr,E1)
JOINT liESOLUTION Proposing An Amendment to the PonAtittalon of the United HIAtes retAting to eases where the President is unable to illPchnoto the powcre and antics of ht. olltoo
Attitet.r —
SIVTION 1. In ease of the removal of the Preshient from Office, or of his death or resignation, the Vice President shill become President for the unexpired portion of the then current term.
Sac. 2. If the President shalt declare in writing that ho is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office, such powers and duties shall be discharged by the Vice President as Acting President.
Svc. 3, If the President does not so declare, the Vico President, if satisfied of the President's inability, and upon approval in writing of a majority of the principal officers of the executive departments, stunt discharge the powers and duties of the office as Acting President, The Congress may by late declare which ogieers, numbering not less than seven among them heads of executive depart-tnents appointed by the President by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, shall for the purposes of this article be deemed to be principal officers of the executive departments.
SEC. 4. Whenever the President declares in writing that his inability is terminated, the President shall forthwith discharge the powers and duties of his office.
Sm. 5. Inenercr the Congress, two-thirds of each House concurring-therein, shall find that a grave crisis has arisen with regard to a question of the inability of the President to discharge the powers and duties of ills office and that a prompt and satisfactory determination cannot be concluded under the provisions of sections 1, 3, and 4 of this article, the Senate and House of Representatives assembled and voting as one body shall forthwith proceed to make a determination of the question by majority vote; and such a determination of the inability of the President or its termination, by the Senate and House of Representatives, shalt be conclusive, any provisions of sections 3 and 4 of this article to the contrary/ notwithstanding.
Sze. O. The Congress shall have power to implement the provisions of this article by appropriate legislation.
Src. 7. This article shall be inoperative unless it shall have been ratified as an amendment to the Constitution by the legislatures of three-fourths of the several States within seven years from the date of its submission.
STATEMENT OF EDOWS W. W'suon, PROFESSOR or POLITICAL SCIENCE, EASTERN MICHIGAN COLLEGE
Mr. Chairman, and members of the subcommittee, I appreciate very much the opportunity to present my views to you on this very important and delicate problem. I am well aware of the enormous time pressure under which you work and I shall endeavor to come to the point with dispatch.
PliESIDENTIAb INAIIIIATY	137
it tilit..firs !hitt nip coilkot1111.11,11 scholars, I he public, and the Congress which Inciteles unions Ifs Members many nide etteletilit of the Constitution, ore nil remiewlett divided over the question es to whether we should see); a solution through nil net of Ciatgress or through on ittlientimeitt to the Constitution. White I non ittliong those who believe the twairess tins power to enact n sidution, I have reluctantly but firmly clone lu the conrlushrn that both approaches are necessary to it !nippy conclusion. I itroeecil first to the matter of an filiictithrielit.
Illn 14111;111IllIng to you n pinll for nit amendment to the Constitution. I have Weed the pinn 111o011 Oho proposal made by then Attorney General Brownell, with the approval of President Eisenhower, to the house Jtulicinry Committee's fiulwonuulllec uu N(4111(.11110 Inability, April I, 1057. I hove loath. some Anuses 111111 some ittltlitlims, tot you will observe, but it NMI reLnitall the finale-invillois of Iin.1111111111imlreilloWpi !don. I have chosen lo siert with that proposal Dm a baste for two reit:ems. First, I believe It Is a good and constructive tip-pro/tell; mecitiel, I believe limy proposed on 11 national! problem endorsed by the President should 'Hive serious COtIghleroll(111 and when the problem concerns his office and his office alone, ng Is the case here, I think his Ideals should brae distinct priority. They NIIMIld receive the first. nod foremost censidern-lion. I have embodier1 my prepesed touching up of the mitniolidratIon's plan 111 n draft for an amendment to the Constitution. I do not pretend that I inn In oily way an expert at tills sort of thing—indeed you will doubtless observe dint I urn no more titan sill innateur—but I believe I call convey my thoughts to yell in less (line by following a definite proposal.
tieetton I of Ibis plan Is identieni with rection I of the administration's plan as presented by Mr. Brownell. I huve copied it word for word. It should Iota-coke no controversy. It merest declares that upon the removal or death or resignation of the President. the Vice President becomes President. It establishes the same rule rewarding removal or resignation that we have always followed In ease of the death of the President. With regard to the situation at the death of n President It adds nothing to our established practice. What-over zany have been the intention of the trainers of the Constitution—and ft was probably (hat the Vice President should be Acting President—the 117 years of history that have followed the John Tyler precedent would appear to 1111V0 111'0011e(1 a settled answer. All seven Vice Presidents who have Noe-(vetted deceased Presidents have taken the Presidential oath, have regarded themselves as Presidents, and the Nation as a whole In both official and private circles has generally accepted their view. It would be rather late to latel all these years as a period of constitutional error.
Section 2 of this plan Is nn exact copy of the same section of the Eisenhower-Brownell plan. It merely states that the President may declare in writing his own Inability, thus calling on the Vice President for temporary service as Acting President. It ends all danger that the elected President would be ousted. This section seems to me to .10 no more than plain commonsense and it should stir little controversy. I think Mr. Brownell made a correct observation when he expressed the opinion that "this provision, standing by itself' would take care of most of the cases of Presidential inability that we will ever face. It is a patent fact that the Presiden has a job of rnankilling proportions and we surely should not hesitate to grant him this avenue of temporary respite.
Section 3.of this plan carries the substance of the Eisenhower-Brownell plan, 1. e.,,that if the President fails to declare his own inability, the Vice President, If satisfied of the President's Inability, and upon approval In writing of a maJort7 of the Cabinet (department head component), shall discharge the powers and duties of the office of President as Acting President. The administration's proposal used the expression "heads of executive departments who are members of the president's Cabinet * * *." Serious objection was raised as to this expression betore.the Colter subcommittee of the House (using the term Celler subcom-mitte after its chairman for brevity). The objection centered around the fact that the term "Cabinet" is entirely unknown to the written Constitution and only remotely known to our laws and that it can be expanded or contracted as to membership at the pleasure or even at the whim of a President. Mr. Keating, I believe was disturbed by this indefinite character of the proposal and I think his observation was valid. The plan submitted here contemplates the Cabinet hat puts the matter in more definite terms. It substitutes the words "principal officers" of the executive departments—terms expressly used in the ConstitutIon, article section 2, clause 1. This expression, we are told, bad a direct relation to the development of the Cabinet. President Washington, after unsuccessful efforts to use the Senate as an advisory council, noted that the Constitution authorized
13S	1'REKI1-ENTIA1, INA1111,11T
him hi require "l lie	Writing, of the principal (Veer In earl' of the
vxmitivo Depart meats • • •." It wits Jul II Alla I POPP fit iii Mt	MPIdrn of
ceiling on the department hoots to meet with hint collectively end give their
vt.Nrbal opinlotte and thuti (IlICrilit• Its It celdnet. This revlsitm of section 3 of the administration plan folly Indicates the enblitot without using the words and yet, for the purposes of snob nn nntemintent, nvolds the Intleilitite elements.
The Congress would be empowered to declare which of the prittelpni ofilcere ore to share with the Vice President an inability decision. The queliticntion "nutn-boring not less than seven" is used rather limn the number 10 in order that such an omoillitient would not by indirection pose obstacles to future executive re-orgettisatin In requiring to department heads. The ehances however, are most remote that any future reorient's/Olt/it plans would yell fur if/28 thrill 7 deportment heads.
The use of the enbittet for such n purpose seems to me to offer innumerable advantages. Time forbids that we note but a few of the virtues of the phut,
It Is Isireshingly simple—in fact go simple flint ninny of us, including myself, unconsciously shied away from tt In the early stages of the current discussions-and with n complicated problem we ought to welcome nil of the simplicity that we eau get.
It involves no additional tunehlttery--no addition to the ever mounting nuns-her of hoards and commissions mid tigencles, however necessary, that seem to he visited upon us us a sort of price for the comforts of modern civilisation anti for our security ht n dangerous age.
ply this pion we would refrain front imposing on the Westfield the psychological Itanard and potential embarnssment of haring ever hovering over him the shadow of n special Inability commission, perhaps looking for a way in which to make Itself useful, and serving as a constant reminder to the President that any day he may break down physically or become a mental incomnpentent. As Mr, Brownell expressed It, we do not want to place a President "constantly on trial as to his health."
It time Mould be of the essence—and it certainly may be in this age of manmade earth satellites and the like—we can devise no agency which would be in better position to give a prompt, informed Judgment. The Cabinet is close to the President, close to the Vice President--since Vice Presidents by courtesy of successive Presidents have now held Cabinet seats for a quarter of a century—and close to the problems which cluster around the White House door.
It would offer us the most abundant Insurance against resort to inability pro-(*Wings born of political bias. The Vice President is regularly a member of the President's political party. The department heads are appointed by the President, with senatorial approval as little more than a formality in most cases. They are normally members of the President's political party, and If there is an occasional exception, he Is usually a political supporter of the President. Their relation to the President is highly liductary and they have a tradition of firm loyalty on the record as a whole. They would be among the last to tolerate a politically inspired move to embarrass the President with a groundless inability proceeding. This is an extremely Important point for it might be less dangerous to leans the whole inability problem unsolved than it would be to adopt a plan which would leave the door ajar for political assaults. It would leave the primary responsibility for the maintenance of active executive power to members of that political party to which the American people hare in a sense intrusted the executive power for 4 years. If we believe in party responsibility, then this should be wholesome.
It would be in keeping with our principle of separation of powers and would afford the maximum of protection of the independent status of the executive. The decision would be made inside the executive branch. The President's official family would give the answer. No intruders would be interfering. The official family could make its decision quietly and informally and without the sort of ado that might impair the dignity of the office of President, by all odds our most magniticent contribution to the science of government.
The public would hare the greatest assurance that there would be no temporary and involuntary displacement of the elected Chief Executive unless we should experience a s!multaneous occurrence of two grave situations, namely, high level executive power inactivated by a President's disability and a state of public affairs which 'squires immediate directives from an active executive head. Any precipitate aed ill-advised effort to displace the President without his consent for ever so short a time might disturbingly disrupt the unity of the Nation.
:6i1H	fl' AI3ILITY	139
Finally, alaiperhaps most Important of all, it is plan In which the President can have confidence. To adopt a scheme which involves a source of anxiety to the President would be worse than to leave the matter unsettled as it is toting. Thu President, as the Congress fully recognizes, carries crushing burdens and we must by all means haven plan which Is satisfactory to him. On this point Treat. dent NIsenhower Is surely the most competent man In America to speak. On three oreastlitns Shim he became Chief I:xecutitia he has been stricken will Illness munielenttly sertmot to threaten his continued working capacity. There is no question but i ha t lie has given the matter we are discussing most serious thought. I think his !dean on the subject should carry great weight and he has made It plain that the Cabinet Is the proper body to share with the Vice President in melting an innbliity decision.
As you know, some able students of the problem have expressed serious doubts about the suitability of the Cabinet (department head component) for such a function. They contend that the Cabinet by reason of its loyalty to the President will tend to shield him and, therefore, it can not be relied upon to give approval of a temporary accession by the Vico President even if the need is quite patent. They point to the historical record—to the failures of the OarfleId and Wilson Cabinets to take affirmative action. I think those cases should be discounted entirely today for three reasons. First, at the time of the Oartleid and Wilson affairs tine Cabinet had twitter statutory nor constitutional authority to take eflirmative notion. Many would have regarded affirmative action by them as extraordinarily presumptuous behavior. By contrast, under the current proposal the Cabinet heads would have expressed constitutional authority and indeed the duty to approve a temporary Acting President status for the Vice President if the need should clearly arise. Second, In the former cases the Cabinet definitely feared that by affirmetIve action they might be instrumental la ousting their Chief permanently. That danger is completely erased In the Eisenhower-Brownell plan ns It Is made perfectly clear that the Vice President would merely become a temporary Acting President. Third, at the lime of the Garfield and Wilson cases our ocean barriers provided us with a rather smug national security and a Cabinet could go ahead and shield a disabled Chief without patently hazarding the security of the Nation. That situation is gone and we all know It. It le Incredible that a Cabinet today, having within its ranks the Secretary of State who is supposed to keep In close touch with foreign developments and the Secretary of Defense who has a large responsibility for our military safety, would refuse to approve the temporary accession of the Vice President to the post of Acting President if our national security would otherwise be jeopardized. If our Cabinets in this day have each confused notions of loyalty there Is little hope for us as a nation anyway. !Thy not give the Cabinet credit for knowing, at the very least, that we live in sn atomic age?
Section 4.—This plan copies	Eisenhower-Brownell proposal word for word
as to section 4. It means thrt when the President declares in writing that his inability is terminated he performs again as President and the Vice President's function as Acting President has been concluded. This needs no elaboration.
Section 5 would be an addition to the Eisenhower-Browner, plan. During Mr. Brownell's testimony before the Celler subcommittee, Mr. Keating rattled a very significant point. As he saw It, we might get a chaotic condition. One day the Vice President with Cabinet approval might say the President is unable and the next day the President might say that he was able and so on ad infinitum. I think he was right. While the chances of such a situation are most remote, it is a possibility and If we are going to close a gap we ought not to leave a gap. Section 5 would completely close the gap. Congress could then step in. By a two.thirds vote of both Houses, Congress could declare the patent fact that a prompt and satisfactory determination could not be attained under sections 2. 3, and 4. The two-thirds vote Is suggested•as assurance that Congress will not interfere unless the situation is really out of hand. On the other hand, If the situation should become chaotic I cannot imagine a failure of the two Houses of Congress to come up with the two-thirds vote. Once Congress has made its declaration, it would proceed to take positive action. With both Houses voting ax one body and by majority vote it would make the necessary determination of the inability question, and its determination would be conclusive. The joint body and majority vote are suggested in order that we will tot risk a congressional deadlock. Congressional action would be a last resort. Primary responsibility for the settlement of an inability question would be left within the executive household. There would be no congressional interference until the executive family exhibited its incapacity to handle the matter, and to such a case It would invite and deserve the congressional intrusion.
140	1'RESIDENT1AL I N All11.1TY
Section 0 IR also an addition to the Eisenhower-Brownell plan. I have ',ingested the word "Ituplement" rather than the usual word "enforce" us the amendment would be in the larger sense self-executing. However, some legimIntion Would doubtless be necessary with regard to the organisation and procedure of the 2 !louses operating na l body under section 5.
Section 7 is nn exact copy of section 5 of the Eigenbowerlirownell proposal. It Is routine and self-expinnntory.
THE STATUTORY APPROACII
I said in the beginning that I thought both amendment and statute would be necessary to n complete solution. Even if we wait until an amendment is ratified It will then doubtless be necessary for Congress to implement the amendment by law. With an amendment such as la suggested here It would certainly ho necessary for Congress to ineeentent sections a and r• by laws, Furthermore, It might to well, rind I think it would be, for Congress to consider going nhend nod enacting the substance of sections 2, 8, and 4 Into law. I believe Congress has ample power to do so under the Constitution. The statute would hold the line pending the ratification of the amendment and I do not believe it would have to hold very long. I believe the States would ho quite prompt In ratifying the amendment. There has been so mueh.dlscussiun of the Inability matter and Its gravity during the past 2 years that the public has been made well aware of the need of action. I ant sure that the States will speedily ratify any reasonable amemintent dealing with the situation.
(piscussiolt nit the record.)
Senator KEVAINER, I have I or 2 questions to ask you, sir, and
then I shall ask Mr. Smithey and Mr. Callaghan if they want to ask
any questions.
'I'm say you think that this problem can constitutionally be handled
by statutet
Ain \Wynn. Yes, Mn Chairman.
Senator KErAtivrit. What would you think of the proposal made by Mr, Fowler. that we pass a law which would be an interim measure, and then reinforce it with the submission of a constitutional amendment. simply giving the Congress the power to act in this field?
Mr.. Wixom Mr, Chairman, I agree with the first part of your question. I think by all means that Congress should pass an interim
statute. I think they have power to and should.
I disagreo—and I also think a constitutional amendment' should be submitted parallel or even before, I believe the constitutional amendment should be submitted and then immediately after its submission, there should be a statute.
My reason for saying first a constitutional amendment is this: I have no doubt. this has been discussed so much, Mr. Chairman, by the people, any reasonable amendment to the onstitution is going to be ratified by the States, and it is going to be ratified very rapidly by the States if it is submitted.
But I would think you should propose the amendment first; then pass the statute
Then I think you are much less likely to experience an Executive veto.
Now I am not going to be presumptuous enough to speculate on the interrelations between the Congress and the Executive but I can see where there is a great chance of an Executive veto, regardless of who is President or of what party, unless an amendment is submitted first, and I disagree with merely authorizing Congress to act.
My position is that while they now have the power to act, I do not believe Congress should have the power to act except in a last resort, and I prefer a proposal such as I have presented where we give Con-
PRMIDENTIAb INADH,ITY	141
gross the power to net in section 6, I believe it is, of what I propose, only i f the Executive family does not settle it.
nut if we propose an amendment that Congress can interfere, then we are proposing, I suppose, that Congress can interfere at any time, and I think the Executive would be frightened by it.
If we propose an amendment, such as this, limiting congressional power, Mr. Chairman,
than I do not believe the Executive would be ninny so constrained to veto re statutory approach, because tho Emu-five would feel confident the amendment was going to be adopted.
But if you do not have an amendment which limits congressional power, the Executive might feel, "Any act of Congress which I approve sets a precedent for congressional intrusion."
That is my answer to that question, Mr. Chairman.
Senator KiirAtivra. It has been suggested that rather than just an amendment authorizing Congress to act, that is a constitutional amend-men authorizing Congress to act, that the resolution might be worded to authorize Congress to set up procedures for determining, which would be the distinction—it would mean that Congress itself was not to be the determining body.
Mr: WAtio l r. Yes.
Senator KzrituVr.a. Would that, make any difference in your thinking?
Mr. WAuoir. Mr. Chairman, I believe that would still have some of the weakness—I should not say weakness, but some of the source of anxiety to the Executive that a simple' amendment empowering the Congress to act would have, because if Congress is empowered to set up the procedures, I suppose they. could set up procedures which might irighteh the Executive. They might set up procedures requiring physical examinations and that sort of thing, and, as Mr. Brownell Suggested, to require the PeeSkitnt to have one doctor after the other coino in and examine thePresident, to make the White House a clinic, it might be frightening to the Executive, I think, Mr; Chairman.
Senator KEFAVJVER. Professor Waugh, you said that there was great public interest in this and you felt an amendment would be readily adopted.
I agree with you. I think there is great public interest, but 'you are closer to the people out in the country, their thinking about this 'in the universities.
Do you find this is a subject that is being discussed and thought of and debated by students in universities and people here and there?
Mr. WAtion. Mr. Chairman, certainly among student groups it is.
I may say that repeatedly, for instance, members of the political science faculty in the institution where I teach at least have been interviewed by students in recent months on the question, because of what they say are their intercollegiate debates, debating with other colleges on the question.
I think the public is interested, though I really think this has happened, that the matter has been studied so long—now it has been some time since Mr. Geller submitted his questionnaire and then the Ilouse held hearings, and the Senate is now holding hearings—I think a great many of the public are, you might say, getting to feeling., "Oh well, they are going to discuss it, but we don't believe anything is
22324-58-10
1.I2	PHESIDENTI.11. IN.11511.11Y
going to be done. There, %rill he some more plans presented." Bin they do not believe anything will be done.
I think the public has gotten lethargic about it, but I think the public, if Komething were proposed, would say yes, told I think it wonted be rat i
Senator HErauvrit. Mr. Smithey, do you have ;my questions? r. SMITHEY. Yes, sir.
Professor Waugh, I notice that your proposal here would place the initial determination of the inability of the President in the Cabinet. Now the subeommittee has had witnesses who have objected to (hat prOtsI41111V on the basis that it interjects appoint ire officers into n deter-minat ion Of who should occupy all Pled ire Ave.
Now what is your comment with respect tothat objection?
Nit. WAvon. Mr, Smithey, I ant not very much impressed by that objection. My feeling is that in the processes of democracy, election is a means to an end. just casting a ballot for the purpose of voting for someone means li tt le. It is a means to an end.
So I feel that. when we go out. to vote for President, we east a ballot for that candidate for President, of course we know the electoral college indirectly is in there, but now it is virtually direct election. I think the people say, "This is the person we believe will carry out policies (list we believe in. We believe in this man. Now if we believe m this man, we believe in this man's ability to aproint people who believe as he ilms."
I look upon the appointments made by the President, as the instrumentalities of carrying out. the people's will at the time of election.
They are, as I see it, indirect representatives of the people themselves, because they are appointed by a person the people have virtually chosen.
Furthermore, they are confirmed by the Senate. In most cases it is a formality with the Cabinet and t think that is proper, but they are confirmed by the Senate.
So they have appointment by a President chosen by the people indirectly and confirmed by the United States Senate, now chosen by the people.
So I think there is enough popular representation there to erase that. objection.
Mr. SMITIIEY. I take it. that you would define one of the powers and duties of the office of the presidency as being the power to remove or replace members of the Cabinet.?
Mr. WArotr. I do, yes.
Mr. &unfurl-. Do you perceive any difficulties which might arise in the recovery of the office by the President if the Vice President were to assume the duties of the presidency and then discharge members of the Cabinet and appoint people of his own persuasion?
Mr. WArop. I do perceive a difficulty there, Mr. Smithey. I feel this way about it, though. There is no way on earth that we can remove every difficulty, and I like to quote what Alben Barkley, the late and lamented Vice President, said. On one occasion I remember Mr. Barkley was addressing a group, and when he went to this group he was with a newspaperman, as I recall the incident now, and it happened to be a Democratic group.
Senator ICEFAVVER. That wouldn't have been unusual for the Vice President.
Pltr-inl:VII‘I. INABILITY	143
Mr. WA mi. Not unusual, Mr. Chairman, for Mr. Barkley to be with a Democratic group. And some of the younger Democrats remarked that Warren Harding was dishonest. Mr. Barkley immediately took issue. lie said:
Warren Harding was not dishonest, however regrettable the [vandals in big administration were.
Ile said :
once a person becomes President of the United States, it does something to him, and any citizen of the United States when he becomes President, that office 'does something to him and gives him one purpose, and that Is to do his hest for the American people.
I think that same. thing applies to a Vice President when called temporarily into the chambers of that Ake to perform those ditties, and I myself believe the Aimee is most remote that a Vice President actin); as President would take advantage of the stricken President. I believe the public would resent it.
I think if it is a temporary illness, let's say it was such as President Eisenhower's ileitis attack or something like that, should the Vice President conic in and tear up things, there would be such public resentment that it would ruin things and I believe—
Mr. SMITBEY. In other words, you believe he would forgo one of his prerogatives in order to maintain stability?
Mr. WAUGH. That is right.
Senator KEFAUVER. He would likely have the feeling that he may
just be acting for a few weeks or months and that there would be public resentment if he changed the team drastically.
Mr. Wsuon. Yes, Mr. Chairman, exactly.
Mr. SMMIET. I notice in your plan that you call for the initial action by the Cabinet or by the principal officers of the executive departments.
Mr. WAUOII. Yes.
Mr. Smrruzy. And that you leave a residual power in the Congress to settle the matter should they fail to act.
Mr. WAuoir. Yes.
Mr. &mum For some reason, or should some difficulty, as you have suggested,  occur.
Mr. WAUGH. Yes.
Mr. SMITM:Y. Now do you see any issue of separation of powers involved in any amendment such as this?
Mr. Wsuon. Mr. Attorney, I do not. I feel the separation of powers principle is one that should protect the independence of the Executive, but already in the Constitution we have all the way through congressional participation in the choice, even the choice of an Executive, if the electoral college fails.
So if this is any violation of separation of powers, certainly the Fathers put in the Constitution something that would be.
But I do believe that any amendment which gives the Congress substantive power to intrude at once would go further into the invasion of the separation of powers than anything that the Fathers had in mind.
Here is the last resort proposition.
Only if the executive household does not settle its own problem, then somebody has to. and I cannot see anything better than the
144	PRESIDENTIAL 1NABIDITY
Congress. I do not think the Supreme Court should, Mr. Attorney. I think it is something of a political quest ion, and I think the Supreme Court m 
ight have to review, for instance, in later cases, action in which it has taken port, and if I nm correct, the Chief Justice has spoken out that he himself would be reluctant. to see the Supreme Court, brought into it. So what is left of flue three branches? There is the Congress us a last resort. That, is the way I see it.
Mr. SMITHEY. I notice that you have no speci tic or no direct provision for the recovery of the powers end duties.
Do you feel that the only requirement on that point should be the decision by the President as to whether he is able to resume?
Mr. WAumi. The decision by the President as to whether he is able to resume his powers and duties, yes, Mr. Smithey, I do. But when we come to section 5, when we conic, there, I think the language is brood enough under section 5 if the Congress now has reached a, determination of the inability of the President, if it got to that place,
if the executive. family did not settle it and it got that bad, something terrible has hoppened in the executive department. Then in that case I do not believe this proposal would indicate that, the President's own statement would be conclusive. If the Congress declares him in a state of inability, and then he states that he is able again, I think that Congress is still irr position there to interject. itself
under section 5.	. . Mr..SMITHEY. Ibw- would }rouresolve the issue of the recovery of the powers and duties of the office?
Mr. WAt-cot. Under section 5? .	•	.	.
Mr. SMITHEY. Under the situation you outlined.. You did sug-
gest, an instance'	in which the President might not, recover on his own initiative the powers and duties of the office,
Mr.	Yes.
Mr. SnrrilEy. In that event, how would they be resolved?
Mr. IYAvon. They would be recovered in 'that event—in the 'first place, he would normally recover them under section 4.. That would normally be the recovery, in any ease. In any ease' if the Presidenthas declared his own inability or if the Vice President, with the approval of the majority of the department heads in writing, has declared him unable, section 4 still would come into being if ho says, "I em able now," and he recovers his powers and duties:
Then suppose the next day the Vice President disagrees. If that happens and you get a quarrel, then section 5.comes into operation.
Mr. SMITHEY. Wouldn't it be better to resolve the issue by providing some mechanism for the resumption of the powers and duties of the office rather than leaving it to the President's own initiative?
Mr. WAuoit. Normally I do not think so. Normally I think that we should leave it as section 4 does, with the President's own'announce-ment.
If I may explain it this way, Mr. Brownell said before--;-may I say the Celler subcommittee for short, Mr. Chairman, because those subcommittee have long terminologies—Mr. Brownell said section 2 end section 4 would settle alone nearly every case of inability that. we are going to face. That usually the President, if he really is disabled and he knows he is not going to be ousted in the situation, he is going to invoke No.2. And then certainly when he is able to net, he is going to invoke No. 4, and that would be conclusive at that moment..
PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY	145
Under sections 2, 3, and 4 his statement is conclusive, but only when the department heads again say "Yon are mistaken," do you have a quarrel there.
Or I think section 6 is broad enough, Mr. Smithey, for this. Suppose a Cabinet would shield a President. If things were going to the dogs, if they were just all failing to do anything about it, if it was a patent situation, the Congress by two-third vote could come in there. The limping° does not confine diem to a quarrel. But I myself have great cmilidence. I have heard criticisms of Congress, but I have spent a year in 1Vashington in studying and visiting, and my own opinion is that with regard to the Members of Congress, their integrity is certainly equal to or above the average of the American people. Therefore, I do not believe two-third of both Houses would declare a grave crisis unless there was one. I do not believe they would. Then I think if they had to step in and declare the President disabled, their power would st ill be retained without another two-thirds vote, because that resolution would be standing still in a grave situation.
If the President stepped up and said, "I am able to act," and he really was not, suppose he was insane, Congress has still that substantive power.
Mr. SMITHEY. Mindful of the fact that we are here dealing with the Constitution, it occurs to inc that. we should examine all contingencies.
Mr. WAtion. Yes, sir.
Mr. SMITHEY. Now, one of the contingencies which might occur would be that the President might become, by virtue of the great weight of his office, mentally incapacitated. That fact would not prevent him, however, from declaring in writing
Mr. WAUGH. That is right.
Mr. SMITHEY. That he thought he was able to resume the powers and duties of his office.
Mr. WAumf. That is right.
Mr. SMITHEY. Now, if there is no direct provision for the recovery of the powers and duties of his office other than the President's own act, wouldn't the possibility just outlined present a gap in your proposal?
Mr. WAvoit. I do not think so, Mr. Smithey, under section 5. I think it would present a gap under section 4, as Mr. Brownell left it. That was one thing I was worried about, that the President, and with no offense to the office, has such problems we wonder sometimes why a President doesn't lose his mind with all the problems that he has.
If he lost his mind, he could, as you stated, write., "Yes, I am perfectly able, more able than I ever was," and that would put right back in, but then the Vico President, with majority approval of the Cabinet, could put him right back out, you see. Then that situation would call for congressional action under section 5. That is my feeling, and my feeling is when Congress once declares by a two-thirds vote, that the situation is grave, the substantive power of Congress is now in full force, and their decision as to inability or its termination then becomes conclusive.
Mr. SMIITTEY. Mr. Chairman, I have no further questions.
Mr. CALLAGHAN. I have none, Mr. Chairman.
Senator KEFAUVER. Professor Waugh, your statement is entitled to and will receive very serious consideration.
140	PRESIDENTIAL MID LITT
Mr. Weuou. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator KEFAUVLR. It is quite apparent that you have given this matter a tremendous amount of study and you have also taken into consideration the realities of political life in the Nation. We are very grateful to you and to Mrs. Waugh.
Mr. Wetran. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for the opportunity to speak.
Senator KEFA TATER. Our next hearing will be on Tuesday at 11 o'clock, at which time we expect to hear from the Attorney General of the United States.
We will stand in recess until then.
(Whereupon, at 12:30 p. m., the subcommittee was recessed to-reconvene at 11 a. m., Tuesday, February 18,1958.)
PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY
TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 18, 1958
UNITED STATES SENATE,
SUBOOMMTITER ON CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENTS
OF TIRE Com airrrxx ON THE JUDICIARY,
"Washington, D. C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to recess and subsequent postponement, at 2 p. m., in room 457, Senate Office Building, Hon. Estes Kefauver (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Senators Kefauver (presiding), O'Mahoney, Wiley, Langer, Dirksen, Hruska, and Carroll.
Also present: Wayne H. Smithey, counsel, and Richard F. Warn-baoh, clerk to the subcommittee.
Senator KEFAUVER. The committee will come to order. Off the record.
Discussion off the record.)
Senator DIRKBEN. Can I note for the record, Mr. Chairman, that Senator Langer and I may leave at 2:30 briefly to conduct a short hearing on a nomination in room 424, and we will come risht back.
Senator KEFAUVER. We are pleased to have the distinguished Attorney General of the United States to give us his views in connection with the problem of Presidential disability.
Mr. Rogers, you proceed in your own way.
STATEMENT OF HON. WILLIAM P. ROGERS, ATTORNEY GENERAL OF THE UNITED STATES
Mr. ROGERS. Mr. Chairman, members of the subcommittee, a matter of serious concern to the people of this country is the problem of what happens when a President is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his Office in the case of illness or other unexpected emergency. There is agreement that there should be clarification and improvement of our constitutional system relating to such inability. The question is what is the most desirable and appropriate procedure for accomplishing this objective.
After careful study, I believe that at:.tion to amend the Constitution is necessary to eliminate uncertainty and to provide for the orderly conduct of government in time of future crises due to a President's inability to act. The plan which the administration has recommended for favorable consideration by Congress, I believe, provides a workable and satisfactory solution.
Senator KEFAUVER. It will be printed in the record without objection.
147
148	PR ESI DENTIAL INABILITY
(The material referred to is appendixes I, II, and III, beginning on page 177.)
?kir. Itoor.as. I think that, the subcommittee is in a general way familiar with that, and I will cover the provisions of the administration proposal at a little greater length in a moment. You will notice that the proposal would amend section 1, article II, of the Constitution, and would be substituted for part of paragraph 6.
Now, the whole of the said paragraph in the Constitution is set forth in my statement on page 3. And the portion of such paragraph for which the new proposal is a substitute is underlined in this statement.
I would like to first, if I may, talk about why action is needed. Strong disagreement prevails today concerning the status and tenure of a Vice President during the inability of the President. Distinguished students of the Constitution have contended that a Vice President would merely act as President for the duration of the inability. Other respected students of the Constitution have argued that a Vice President would actually become President and replace the disabled President for the remainder of the term. This difference in opinion respecting a Vice President's status and tenure during a President's inability fully demonstrates the compelling need to remove the existing doubt and confusion once and for all.
Soon after President William Henry Harrison died in 1841, Senator William Allen of Ohio objected to establishing the precedent of a Vice President's becoming President upon the death of the latter, beouse ho thought that the precedent would complicate the situation in the future when a President became disabled. As Senator Allen indicated, study of the records of the Constitutional Convention shows that a Vice President was not intended to become President under the succession clause, but merely to exercise the powers and duties of the President until his inability was removed.
The subcommittee's attention is directed to a chart which is attached to my statement. That is appendix II, and I think if you will look at that for a moment, you will see the reason why there has been confusion throughout our history on this matter of Presidential inability.
Turning now to appendix II, you will notice that the Constitutional Convention agreed to two provisions and they are set forth in the
lofthand column of that appendix. And you will notice that in both cases: the express language was stated, that. the Vice President shall
exercise those powers and duties until another President be chosen
or until the inability of the President be removed. And you will included: So in the second one set forth that the same language is 
So it is perfectly clear that those two articles as passed and agreed to by the Convention were intended to provide that the Vice President, in the event he exercised the powers and duties of the President who was unable to act, would act only until the inability of the President was removed.
Now, those two articles agreed to by the Convention were then sent to the Committee on Style. And the function of the Committee on Style was merely to improve the language, but not in any way to change the substance that had been agreed to by the Convention.
But it was in the process of correcting the style, in the Committee on Style, that the confusion arose. And you will see why it arose.
PRESIDKNTIAL INABILITY	149
If you look at article II, section 1, as changed by the Committee on Style and finally adopted, you will notice that the language at the • end—
And such officer shall act accordingly and until the disability shall be removed or a President shall be elected—
it is arguable as to whether that applies to the last section or the whole section of that article.
Now, as I say, that is the real reason why the Constitution is indefinite today, because of that change made by the Committee on Style which made the decision as to final language that appeared in the Constitution.
Regardless of the intent of the framers of the Constitution, seven Vico Presidents have, upon the death of the President, been recognized as having become the President in fact. As a result of the precedents established whenever a President died, it seems to be assumed without question that the Vice President becomes President and does not merely act as such when the President dies. This appeared to be Daniel Webster's view at the time of President Harri-son's death—i. e. that Vico President John Tyler actually became President. These precedents make it easier to argue that a Vice President supersedes the President whenever he exercises Presidential power. As we will note in a moment, in both the Garfield and Wilson cases, the Vice President was not asked to act as President largely because of the fel r that he would become President and thereby oust the incapacitated it cumbent. As a result, the full extent of the disabilities was carefully guarded because of personal loyalty to the disabled President. Moro important, the public interest could not help but suffer from being deprived of an active President in both cases.
The things I am going to talk about next I think are probably familiar to the subcommittee, but I would like to review them, because I think it points up the most important aspect of this problem which I believe has been to some extent overlooked in this whole discussion of presidential inability. Since Harrison's illness was short, no question of inability was involved. However, President Garfield lingered for 80'days after lie was shot on July. 2,.1881. During this 80 days he performed only 1 official act—the signing of an extradition paper. Although his mind was clear during the first days of his illness: he was unconscious and it was reported that he suffered from hallucinations during the last days of his illness. Moreover, he was physically unable to discharge the duties of his office during a substantial part of the 80 days involved. It cannot be seriously contended that there was no important business requiring the President's attention. Actually, officers were unable to perform their duties because the President was unable to commission them. There was a serious crisis in our foreign affairs. Yet the Department heads transacted only such routine business as could be transacted without the President's supervision. It was claimed that important questions of public policy which could be decided only by the President were simply ignored.
Equally important, public opinion was sharply divided about the manner in which public business "as handled. There was objection to having the affairs of the executive branch managed by the Cabinet, objection that Secretary of State Blaine was guilty of usurping the
150	P RE,011)1,1 Net` I AI* I N A1111,11' Y
President's duties, and insistent demands that the Vice President 0 NOM itie this power and that Secretary flinine's alleged usurpation be . ended immediately.
After Garfield's illness had already dragged on for 00 days, his 'physicians thought ho would recover; but his convalescence was expected to take another 00 days. Therefore, the Cabinet considered the possibility3 of asking Vice President Arthur to act ns President during 0 arfield's recuperation.
Now, this is the significant thing, it• seems to me, about that incident in our history. All seven Cabinet members agreed on the desirability of having Arthur net as President. In other words, there was no question, no dispute as to the inability of the President. Pour of the seven, however, thought that Arthur's exercise of .presidential power would actually make him President for the remainder of the term and thereby oust Garfield from office. It was reported that Attorney General Wayne NineVengh shared these views. Consequently, the Cabinet decided that Garfield should not be advised to ask Arthur to act as President without first telling him of this possibility. Therefore, the whole matter was deferred because the physicians feared that the shock caused by such a discussion might result in the Presidem's death. Oarlie:d's death on September -20, made it unnecessary to solve the problem in 1881.
Nov, the important thing I want to call attention to in that case is this. The question there was not the decision about the inability of the President, Everybody in Onrfield's Cabinet was of one mind, that he was unable to act. The reason that no action was taken was because of the constitutional uncertainty of the meaning of that act. In other words, it was felt that if Vico President Arthur took over he would become President in fact, and that Garfield never could then claim the office again.
Now, that is the weakness, as we see it, in the present Constitution.
Let's go to the Wilson case for a moment, There can be no doubt that President Wilson was actually unable to perform the duties of his office during some part of the period after Ins collapse on September 25, 1919, and until the end of his term on March 4, 1921. Numerous domestic and international matters failed to receive his attention. More important, this inability occurred during the Senate debate on the Versailles Treaty.
The exact degree of Wilson's inability is uncertain. Whatever Wilson's condition, Vice President Marshall, the Cabinet, and the public were not fully advised concerning it. The President's family, his White House staff, and the Cabinet discharged public business in such manner and by such methods as to them seemed appropriate.
History seems to indicate that Mrs. Wilson and Dr. Cary T. Grayson, the President's physician, played an important part in many questions of public policy.
Soon after Wilson's stroke the Cabinet joined with the White House staff in keeping the Government operating. Secretary of State Lansing called 21 Cabinet meetings to transact executive business. When Wilson heard of these meetings,.he accused Lansing of usurping presidential power and forced him to resign. Wilson seemed to think that the Constitution did not authorize the Cabinet to act in his absence, with the result that Government business was interrupted during his
PRMIDY.NTIAL INABILITY	151
Patrick Ttivitilty, Wilson's secretary, reported that Secretary of State Lansing had suggested that, in view of the President's inability, they should ask the A lee President to act as President. fie quotes himself as saying:
You may rest stAured that while Vi'oodrosv Wilson is lying in the White Muse ou the broad of his back I will not be a party to ousting hint.
Timmity also reported that. when Lansing resigned, Wilson said:
To:nutty, It Is never the wrong time to spike disloyalty. Wben Lansing sought to oust ow, I was upon my hawk. I nut on my tot now turd I will not have disloyalty about me.
Because of the belief that the Vice President would actually become President, asking Marshall to act es President during Wilson's inability was viewed ns disloyalty. Consequently, Marshall was looked at with antagonism instead of as a person who could lighten the disabled President's burden. instead of asking Marshall to exercise the powers devolved upon him by the Constitution, they attempted to keep the Government. operating in their own way in order to forestall any serious attempt to declare the President's inability.
A study of the Garfield and Wilson cases shows that there is a real need for a means of supplying an active President during periods of presidential inability. The belief that a Vice President actually becomes President when called to act as such has nullified the constitutional provision for the administration of the Government when a Presidpit is incapacitated. In the other two serious cases of presidential inability to date, the Vice President was not called to act as President and thereby supersede the disabled President for the remainder of the term.
The problem of providing for the exorcise of presidential power during periods of inability would not be solved merely by providing a means by which the inability could be established. Unless the President, his Cabinet, and his other friends are absolutely certah? that he may resume his powers after the termination of his inability, they will tend to oppose any attempt to declare the existence of inability, viewing such a declaration as equivalent to removing the President from office.
I might say that this administration does not support that view. We believe, and as I will point out later, that in the event a Vice President should act as President, that he would act only temporarily, and the President would be able to take over the powers and duties of the office as soon as he recovered from that inability. And Attorney General Brownell testified to that in the House, and I fully subscribe to that. I think the history of the Constitution fully supports that view.
With this history to guide us, and with a need for uninterrupted continuity of Government, we must conclude that action is vital to solve the problem of Presidential inability.
Now I would like to talk for a moment about the administration's plan.
Section 1 confirms the present generally accepted interpretation of the Constitution—that in case of removal of the President from office, or his death or resignation, the Vice President shall become President for the unexpired portion of the then current term. T1.is affirms the result accepted by the Nation seven times in cases of death of a President.
152	PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY
Section 2 of the proposal states that, if a President declares in writing that he is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office,
such powers and duties shall be discharged by the Vico President as
Acting President. This section authorizes a President to announce his own inability and allows him to do so, knowing that his powers
and duties will bo restored to him when ho recovers. Section 2 of this proposal also would require the President to make this announcement in writing. Tho reason for adding this requirement is to preclude a dispute about whether a President actually declared his inability. The existence of a written document will prevent anyone from seriously denying that the President recognized his inability. I believe that section 2 encompasses most of the cases of Presidential inability which are likely to arise. It removes the reason which caused responsible Government officials to fail to act in the Garfield and Wilson Ca sm.
The only objection I have heard to section 2 is that a President might use this section to shirk his duties and responsibilities. The obvious answer is that. a President who used this section to shirk his duties would bo breaking his oath to faithfully execute the Office of President and, therefore, would be subject to impeachment for high crimes and misdemeanors. It a President should ever become so anxious to be relieved of his duties and responsibilities, ho would not need to declare his inability—he could simply resign in conformity with article II of the Constitution.
Section 3 of the plan deals with cases in which the President is unable or unwilling to declare his own inability. In such cases, the Vice President with the approval of a majority of the President's Cabinet would make the decision.
Tho Cabinet is the proper body to participate along with the Vico President in declaring a President's inability. The Cabinet is an executive body, the President's official family. Its loyalty to the President is generally unquestioned. A decision of this body is least likely to be suspected of enabling a Vice President to usurp powers on the pretext of inability. Moreover, the Cabinet is in a position to know at once whether a President is disabled.
Under section 8, there aro several possiblb courses of action. Tho Cabinet could notify the Vice Pfesident when a majority of that body believed that the President's inability was sufficient to warrant a devolution of presidential power on the Vice President. The Cabinet has always notified the Vice President when a President has died; and section 3 would extend this custom to the case of inability. Under section 3 the Vice President might take the initiative without the Cabinet's first inviting him to make the decision. Unlike the provision of the present Constitution, however, section 3 would muire approval by a majority of the Cabinet before the Vico President could undertake the exercise of presidential power.
A Vice President who undertook the exorcise of presidential power would be assured that his action could not seriously be branded as usurpation because that action was previously approved by the President's own appointees in the Cabinet.
In addition to the safeguard provided in section 8 by the Cabinet's role in the process, section 4 contains a second safeguard. It provides that, whenever the President declares in writing that his inability is terminated, the President shall immediately resume the exercise of
PREXIDF:NTIAL INABILITY	153
the powers and duties of his office. Thus, section 4 does, I think, provide a disabled President with a constitutional guarantee that he can regain the powers of his office without the concurrence of any other official or group if he is of the opinion that his inability has been ro• moved.
As a practical matter, if the determination of presidential inability is loft where the Constitution places it now—in the Vice President, or if it is placed in the Vico President and Cabinet—as suggested, the Vice President would never venture to assume the duties of the Presi• dency unless it were clear beyond challenge in any quarter that the President was in truth and in fact actually disabled from performing the functions of his office. With a constitutional provision spelling out that the Vice Pmident only acts as President in a case of inability, and a constitutional provision granting to the President the right to reassert his powers at any time, the Vico President as a practical, political necessity in all probability would secure the approval of the Cabinet, of the leaders and a great majority of the Congress, and of a large segment of public opinion before venturing to assume the presidential duties. On the other hand, with a constitutional provision negating any motive of usurpation in the Vico President b clear language that he only acts as President for a temporary pericx - no Vice President would hesitate—as did Vice Presidents Arthur an Marshall in the two most serious examples of this problem—to perform his constitutional duty of serving as the alternate executive for a temporary period. The President's immediately_family and friends would be stripped of any motive to oppose the Vice President, as in Wilson's case, for on regaining his health the President could simply assort his right to the office.
Senator LANGER. May I ask one question before we leave? Wouldn't it also be well to provide that the Vice President before assuming office should agree to vacate the office as soon as the President said that the disability had passed?
Mr. Rooms. I think that would be all right. But if we had a constitutional amendment such as we suggest here, that would be expressly in the Constitution. So that it would not be necessary, I think, in that case.
Senator LANGER. In other words, in that case the Constitution would agree for the Vice President?
Mr. ROGERS. That is right. Now, that is exactly the point. That is the reason why there is this confusion. And until the Constitution is amended, in my opinion, it will never be clarified, because any Vice President who assumes the powers and duties of the office, can be accused of trying to take over the office. And historically in our country that has been the cause of the difficulty.
Senator LANGER. If he signed this agreement I mentioned, he would be barred absolutely in claiming the office in opposition to the President, if he agreed in writing to step down as soon as the President said the disability had been removed.
Mr. ROOM. Well, there are a lot of students of the ConstitutiOn who think otherwise. For example, Daniel Webster said he felt that any man who exercised the poWers and duties of the President was the President and could not be replaced. And as I say, in Garfield's time, a majority of his Cabinet thought that.
154	1'itESI1)1.N'I'IA1. I NA RI IATY
Now, this administration does not subscribe to that view. I think wo are all in agreement that. any Vice President who exercised the
powers and duties of the office during the inability of a President would be just temporary President, not Acting President. He would not take over the office. But, as I say, that has not been clear. And several Attorneys General have felt to the contrary.
Senator KEFAIIVER. Oft the record just a minute.
1)iseitssion oil' the record.)
Senator KEFAVVEIL While we nib interrupted, are there any questions at this point, Senator Ifruska, or Senator Carroll ?
Senator IiitUBKA. If the chairman pleases—I assume, Mr. Rogers, that you will deal with this idea of the President, by his being able to say his inability is over, at all times possesses the right to veto the action or nullify the action of a majority of the Cabinet and the Vice President to the contrary, doesn't he?
Mr. Timms. That. is right.
Senator IhiusKA. Is that, dealt with later in the statement? Air. Rooms. Yes, sir. That is the very next. thing.
Senator KmtwovEn. Mr. Rogers, would this be a good time to ask you about the objections—not the objections, but the possibility,. extreme though it might be, raised by Congressman Keating, to sections 3 and 4 of Attorney General Brownell's proposal ? These possibilities were dealt with by Professor Waugh, of Eastern Michigan College in his presentation the other day to this committee. Or would you rather wait until you finish your statement before discussing that?
Mr. Rooms. I will tell you, I am not familiar with that criticism. Suppose you outline it to me, and then I can decide. I may have covered it later on in my statement.
Senator Kxymima. Mr. Smithey, our counsel, says that you deal with this in the next few pages of your statement, so we will wait until later on to discuss that.
Mr. ROGERS. All right, Mr. Chairman.
Now, as I said, Mr. Chairman, and Senator Hruska, I don't believe that a.problem would arise if the Constitution were amended, as the administration has suggested. I think that in the discussion of this problem, everyone has focused a great deal of attention on the question of how the inability of the President is decided. And, in my opinion, that is the wrong emphasis.
The emphasis really is once you decide the inability of the President, what is the result? Because if the result is merely a temporary thing, then it is not so difficult to decide the inability of a President. But if the result is that the man who succeeds him is going to become President for good, then the question of inability of the President is a very difficult and drastic decision.
I think once the Constitution clarified that point, and made it clean that, the Vice President merely acted for the President while he was unable to act, then you would not. have this same problem about the difficulty of determining the inability of the President.
As I say, actually there was no difficulty either in Garfield's time or Wilson's time about the inability of the President. Most people agreed he was unable to act. The difficulty was that they did not dare have the Vice President move in—the Vice President didn't want to move in because he was not sure that the President could then take over the office again. I think if you remove that obstacle and had a con-
Pil
PRESIDKN I. INA DlIATY	155
stitutional amendment to make perfectly clear that that was not a question, that the Vice President was merely acting as President---Senator KEFAUVER. Senator O'Mahoney, we are glad to have you here.
Mr. ROOM. Senator O'Mahoney, I was just saying there has been a wrong emphnsis on this matter? I think. There has been a great
deal of discussion about how the inability of the President would be determined. I don't believe that problem would assume very serious proportions if it was clear in the Constitution that the Vice President was merely acting us President.
Senator 0'111AI I ON EY. That was my own theory.
Mr. Roomis. That is right. And I have dwelt on that for some length. Nowt that does leave open this one contingency. And I doubt that the contingency would ever arise—it never has arisen. But I think we should consider it here. What will be the machinery for resolving questions of the President's inability where there is a difference of opinion between the President and the Vice President as to whether the former's inability is ended ?
My predecessor was of the opinion that the Federal courts would disclaim jnrisdietion in such a ease upon the ground that the question presented was politieslt and that the only remedy was impeachment. The consensus of of ion is in agreement with Mr. Brownell that the sole remedy is imp‘climent where there is a wrongful assertion of authority to exercise the powers and duties of the office. The attempt of a President to perform his duties when he was in fact clearly unable to perform might be classed as a wrongful assertion of authority.
It should be noted, however, that impeachment proceedings may be delayed if Congress is not in session. Article 11, section 3 of the Constitution provides that the President may on "extraordinary occasions, convene both Houses., or either of them." It is unlikely, however, that a President under attack for attempting to assert the powers while still suffering inability would convene the Congress to conduct impeacement proceedings against himself. Further study is required to determine how Congress may be convened in the event impeachment proceedings are required in a dispute involving Presidential inability.
Therefore Congress may think it wise to avoid the odium of an impeachment by providing another but a similar process whereby the question of inability could be determined in the unlikely event a President and Vice President were at an impasse. The administration plan could be modified by the addition to section 4 of such a provision. And I refer the members of the committee to appendix
Referring to appendix III, this alternate section 4 would still allow the President to resume the functions of his office at any time, but provide for the immediate action of Congress, whether then in session or not, to resolve the question of Presidential inability raised in writing by the Vice President, supported by a majority of the Cabinet. This would only occur after the Vice President has taken over temporarily, and after the President then asserted his ability to perform, and then the Vice President and the Cabinet still were of the opinion the President was unable to act. By making the charge one of inability rather than impeachment for some offense, the necessary
156	PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY
proceeding's could be conducted in a more appropriate atmosphere. Members of Congress who might be reluctant to impeace the President would not have the same reluctance in removing a President physically unable to perform the duties of his office.
In my opinion this alternate section 4 would place the President, Vice President, and Congress in exactly the proper relationship to the question of inability. The President could always reassert his power, the Vice President would acquiesce except in the unfortunate situation where the President had misjudged his true capacity. In that event Congress would step in and by its consideration of a charge of inability determine the issue. A two-thirds vote of the Senate would determine the existence of a President's inability; a majority vote of both Houses would restore the powers of his office to him. Impeachment would remove the President permanently; a determination of inability would leave to the President nn opportunity later to reassume the powers of his office. The difference between the result reached by impeachment and by an inability proceeding would justify the enactment of the separate inability proceeding, and would render the whole proposed solution more acceptable, I believe, to the public.
Let me stress that the very existence of this ultimate power in Con-gress—which is the only power it needs in relation to this question—would in all probability insure that this ermine situation would never arise. No Vice President would resistfa President reasserting his claim to the powers of the office unless the President were in fact unable to perform. I mean for obvious reasons it would destroy a Vice President—if ho claimed the President was tumble to perform and the President in fact was able to perform. So no Vice President would ever do it, and the majority of the Cabinet would not support him. No President—in fact unable to perform—would be permitted by his family and close personal counselors to reassert his claim and precipitate an issue likely to be resolved against him by Congress.
So I believe, this alternate section 4 were included in the administration proposal, that it would never have to be used, and that the decision of inability would be easy to make and could be really made by the executive branch of the Government.
We must recognize that in this area as in others, not everything is soluble and not everything may be controlled by law. Whatever machinery is adopted, it must not be able to be used as a vehicle for harassing the President. So long as the determination of inability is left within the executive branch, either by the President, or by the Vice President as is now true under the Constitution, or by the Vice
President and Cabinet under the circumstances proposed by the administration, there can be no harassment of the President or diminution of his stature in the eyes of the people. The Vice President is of the
President's own party; the Cabinet is of the President's own choice; if there is a provision that the President can reassume the duties of his office at any time, he is safeguarded.
But if we transfer the power of initial determination of inability out of the executive branch, or in some fashion share it with others outside
the executive branch, then the way is opened for a harassment of the
President for political and personal motives. We may not always have as President a figure of the national and international stature
of President Eisenhower, nor one who has so completely demonstrated his respect for Congress as a coequal branch of Government, whether
PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY	157
dominated by his own or the opposition party, as has President Eisenhower. Our solution must contemplate the testing of it, if need be, in circumstances similar to the time of President Johnson and the Reconstruction Congress, when violent personal differences and party controversy, would invite the Congress to use any power it had to determine Presidential inability as a weapon of harassment—if such a weapon were easily at hand. A possibility of such political harassment could severely impair the Presidency at the very time when assertion of its full power was most needed.
With these guiding principles in mind, let us now examine some other proposals.
Senator ICEFAU VER. I would like to ask you a question at this point, Mr. Rogers.
Professor Waugh, who made a very good impression upon the committee, and who has studied and written extensively on this subject matter, testified before us some days ago. His general feeling was that this was a matter so closely related to the office of the Presidency, that the President's own feelings, wishes, and ideas in the matter should be given extremely sympathetic consideration. And so he started as the basis for his suggestion with the recommendation of Mr. Brownell and of yourself.
He did make two additional suggestions. First, that in section 8, there is some confusion as to just which were the executive departments, and whether in the Defense Department, for instance, there is one executive department under the Secretary of Defense, or whether the Army, the Navy and the Air Force were considered as executive departments. And so he suggested that Congress should by law have the right to declare what officers were to be considered as executive departments for the purpose of the interpretation of section 3.
He pointed out that former Attorney General Brownell's original suggestion had been upon approval in writing of a majority of the Cabinet. I see that you have changed it here to "heads of the executive departments." And that it was rather difficult to determine who was in the Cabinet. One President might have certain people, and another President might have others.
I have always felt that the law was pretty clear that we had 12 executive departments, and that since the passage of the law setting up the Office of Secretary of Defense— I mean 10 executive depart-ments—the Secretary of Defense, that the Army, Navy and Air Force were not considered executive departments within the meaning of this language. Is that your interpretation?
Mr. ROGERS. That is my interpretation? Mr. Chairman.
Senator KEFAUVER. So you do not think that needs any further clarification I
Mr. ROOF-R8. I don't,. I think the Professor is right in suggesting that Congress would have the authority under the "necessary and proper" clause to make that determination, if there was uncertainty about it.
Senator KEFAUVER. They have the 'right to abolish an executive department, whether it is specified here in the constitutional amendment or not.
Mr. ROGERS. That is correct.
Senator ICtrativEn. I agree with you about that.
22824— 58-11
158	PICE8IDENTIAL INABILITY
Tile second suggestion he made was in addition to alternate section 4..
At I •finderitand*in alternate section 4 you	through the same pro-
cedure as in the case of impeachment.. ,But it would not be innpeach-ruent+-it *would be determining inability, and therefore would not, have the stigma of impeachment.. .
	Mr. ROGERS. That is correct.	- •
Senator HirAthrza: And' once inability 'was determined b a two=thirds vott3 of the Senate; then the' Congress; both Houses of Congress,
by a mhjority vote, could determine that the President's inability had
terminated.	‘'•
Mr. 1190ER/3. That is correct.
Senator KEFAIIVER. Now, he suggettainsection that the two Houses of Congress determine by a two-thirds vote, and then by a majority vote the *secondrquestion to be determined—in lien of• gdihg through 'something similar to the system of impeachment.
will furnish, you with his detailed suggestions and hit testimony
abolit it.,	"
,-Atr; 13eatas. I would like to look at that, Senator.
f. 'ID might just mention a couple of other 'thoughts in connection with. this alternate section 4.
It would have about three advantages over impeachment, as I see' =:First-there is the' one you mentioned—that it would not have the stigma attached to it' that impeachment would. Two, impeachment Could •4-,;nly -odour 'if Congrese :happened- to be in session. If:
Con-
re& is not in Session', you could not get an impeachment started; bmiuse,you could 'not get Congress back here- probably.; .And this section' would,- provide that once the Vice President had* filed an in; ' ability petition supported by a majority of the Cabinet; that' Con- .
yres would automatically convene under the provisions of this. So ou would not have a hiatus ih time. Impeachment would be a permanent' act—that Would mean you would'perhianently remove the President—while this provision of the Constitution would be merely:a determination of inability; and if the President recoVered, the Congress could restore him, to' his office. :So I think for those three reasons,
this is preferable to impeachment, and I• think it is in accord with the constitutional impeachment proceeding.-,In other words, it gives ultimate authority to the Congress when the President' and the Vice President are unable to agree on
inability.'	•	•	;	'
Senator KEFAIIVERC 'Well, we always think of imPeachMent As being for high crimes and misdemeanor. This is not a high crime or misdemeanor. As :a matter Of feet, I seem to recall that one of the efforts to impeach a Federal judge, the main charge against him was that he was just dilatOry and wouldn't do any work. I haVe forgotten the Federal Judge's \name. He drew his salary and would not try any •cases, and they brought an impeaclimentcase against him. The Senate held that just being lazy and indiligent Was not a high crime,
o'r misdemeanor:	. .. Senator O'MAitortsy. Mr. Chairman, I am under obligation to iv- • turnto a' joint meeting of the Interior Committee, and the Committee: on Public Works. I have a leave of absence for half an hour in orders to come up here and listen to the ,Attorney General: ' "
Senator- KaIPAUVEB.i We: apOreciatti:thati and I:know the Attorney General would be glad if you would ask him any questions.,
PREdIDENTIAL INABILITY	159
. ,	. •
Senator 014i1Oxyr. would like to told or 2 questions.
I have skimmed through, your statement. In general I agree Pretty :heartily , with it. :I tink, as a Matter of fact, that.you,have disposed *pretty well Of the suggestion of having commission ap-• pointed to handle these things.
I think also 'you' have disposed'of the impeachment procedure, although you adopt' something similar to that in the alternate section 4.
But it seems to me. that there is a variance here from the original Constitution which' is not at all necessary. I am convinced from my reading of the Constitution and the records 'at the time, and of the analysis that you have placed in your paper that it was the intention of the framers of the Constitution to have the Vice President become Acting Presideqt 'and net President. I think it was only the'polit-ical differentiation- between the members of the cabinet of William
t that made Tyler insist upon'
Ohio held for the
ent. This pro-'office Or of e' President
has been.' hoc and that he
•
ro
t at
I
hole for
•
Renty Harrison and the Vi being sworn in as P '
You have "Join interpretation
So. I ques • vides that his death for the change But it makes shoul
Sec the the, ::lise a
Sec future
out that Senator Allen rri raising now.
section 1 of yo
ease, of the	ov
rom. the
dopts the t
the Vice presiders
be only the Acting
ion 2 of
dent
veers and
ged. by t
on 8, ho
isagreem,
•
b
all • duties • Vice ev
r resigner	Vi
nnespi	'of
, th rtion nstituti
re
his ofli
ident
co	: in
in the su
•	:
11:
s ent, 'dent. •
ht
of t Presid e th
' I I
:
tThat is a osed anien resident' f t shall beco current term.
	ally	and as
	ut by	ction of
he it w s intende
be u enxaceliettioon
powers and duties ident.
be a I *nsi
he
ble. If
iseharge
shall be
nable to scharge the
It the 1 !dent des not so d
that is,	'he does n powers and uties of his
•
at he
declare t
•	;
the. Vice Prestd• t, if satisfied of the President's Inablilt In writing of a DINO ty of,the heads of the depertmenti:—	and .upon approval
and so forth
-1.-
081i discharge the tiottro as sec ng resit  ',The queAtion AA arises in' my mind'. is what is the period within Which the Vice President is to act/ How Much, time *ill he give a Sick President to declare or' to make his judgment I There 'Is no
-tithe Unlit-on this. 'So it could bewithin 24 honis. •	.
Mr. ROGE163. - That is correct. •	•	. .
.Sentitor OlkfAireansy. Now, do. you want that I • .	• - •	• •	.
gr. Rooms;	Senator,	' do, bechuae •you might
haVe=L;-I don't in k you can!nieasiire'thia terms of time.-.,It depends 'tin the .eirettistanees.1 You might' hive' a 'situation :develop. where
, • hours eottld be' just :as critical as a week.. •	•	• •; ,	1
.• I:think that 'the reason that it is perfectly feasible and would work 'is thatie ;ViOoPresideiit: Is 'going to assume the povters•and 'duties of the office on a temporary basis unless he has a good deal of support
160	PRESIDEVTIAL INABILITY
I mean he would have to have the support of the Cabinet, he would have to have the support of the legislative leaders. He would have to have a good deal of publics support. The problem is not a problem of the Vice President moving too fast. Really the problem isle make him take some action, in other words, to assume his responsibility.
As you know, in tie case of Wilson, Marshall had no interest in it at all. And he was beseeched by a lot of the leaders of the United States to act.
So I think if we put in emphasis on trying to be sure the Vice President does not usurp the office, we are not facing up to the problem. The problem is how do you get the Vice President to act when he should.
Senator O'MAnoxEr. Well, my feeling is that we are not quite facing up to the problem. I have read an amendment which has been before this committee which constitutes an invitation to the President and the Vice President to agree among themselves. If it has the same virtue as section 2—if the President shall declare in writing—that is the same idea in this other amendment of which I speak. That affords the opportunity for the President and the Vice President to agree among themselves. And the same amendment has none of the points which you have criticized with respect to the commissions outside of existing public offices to judge. And it leaves the matter for the Congress only when the President and the Vice President don't come to an agreement.
Mr. ROGERS. Well, I want to say, Senator, I agree with practically everything you have said. I don't want you to misunderstand me and think I am disputing you.
Senator O'MAIIONEY. I don't mind dispute.
Mr. ROGERS. I don't want to give you the wrong impression, because I may have to dispute you later on, but this time I agree with you.
But insofar as the point you are making now is concerned, I think maybe you have overlooked the fact that the President might not be in a position to agree. Suppose he were forced down at sea and could not be located, or suppose he is in a coma. Now, in those cases, certainly the Constitution as it now stands, we think, would permit the Vice President to temporarily take over the office until the President was able to act.
But because there is—
Senator 01MAnottny. I think it would now, as is stands—except for the fact that the precedent has been created of the Vice President declaring himself President.
Mr. ROGERS. I agree with what you say about Tyler, too. The only reason I think section 1 is all right, and I don't think should be challenged, is because it just recognizes the fact. I mean seven Vice Presidents have become President, and we certainly have accepted that as part of our history, and the constitutional interpretation. So all it is is restating what we have accepted to be the fact.
Senator O'MenoNET. Well you know, I am such a conservative, I like to stand by the old Constitution.
Mr. ROOERS. I think if Tyler had not become President in fact, if he had continued on as Acting President, I agree with you that is what the framers of the Constitution intended, then we probably wouldn't have had this uncertainty as to inability. That is exactly what Senator Allen pointed out. He said if Tyler becomes President
PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY	161
in fact, it is going to cause a good deal of doubt on the inability provision of the Constitution.
Senator O'MAHONEY. Exactly. And now in this alternate section 4, in which you bring Congress in, you provide for a majority vote in the House to determine that the President's inability has not terminated, and then you provide for trial by the Senate like the impeachment proceedings.
Mr. ROGERS. That is right. It is analogous to the impeachment proceedings.
Senator O'MAHONEY, Yes. And I think it would probably be interpreted in that light. And therefore I raise the question for your consideration whether it would not be better to have the determination made by? say, a two-thirds vote of the Conwhen the President, being disabled, declines or is unable to determine it.
That is all I care to say, Mr. Chairman. I don't want to take the time of the Attorney General. I must go back to this other committee meeting at which I am presiding.
Senator Xr2AtIVER. Thank you very much, Senator O'Mahoney. We are glad for your presence and your questions.
Any other questions at this point?
Senator CPMARONEY. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Attorney General.
Mr. ROGERS. Thank you, Senator.
Senator CARROLL. Mr. Chairman, I would like to ask a question here. I have not had a chance to read all of your statement.
Do I understand that if the President declares in writing that he is unable to discharge the duties of his office, that the Vice President will be the Acting President?
Mr. ROGERS. That is correct, Senator.
Senator CAnsop,. Is there anybody or group to pass judgment on the validity of the President's writing?
Mr. ROGERS. You mean the authenticity?
Senator CARROLL. Yes. If the President establishes it in writing, that is in a sense a transfer of Presidential power. Now, if I correctly understood some of the other testimony, if the President should recall that power by a subsequent writing, that that subsequent writing can be contested by the Vice President and a majority of the Cabinet.
Mr. ROGERS. Yes, that is correct.
Senator CARROLL. In other words, the thought running through my mind is that the initial power belonging to the President is now transferred by virtue of a written instrument. That written instrument, I suppose, in writing means it could be dictated, and if his hand touched a pen with his "X" that would be an instrument in writing—that would be a transfer of power. Is that your concept of a writing? Mr. ROGERS. No, I would think that—
Senator CARROLL. Well, that is the law of instruments, isn't it? When we affix a signature to a writing—
Mr. ROGERS. I think it would have to be more than an "X", though, Senator CARROLL. Well, if he touched the pen, that would be a writing. It would be valid in law.
I am thinking in terms of the conditions that obtain here. I think in your previous testimony you had a President who is not conscious. Supposing you had a President who is conscious but paralyzed—who
162	PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY
knew what was going on and could not perform theinannal task, but touched the pen. That would transfer, the power under our concept
here, would it not,	•
Mr. RooFits. I think it would depend upon the circumstances. I suppose there could be circumstances of paralysis so that the signature could he something other than a complete name.
Senator Cmmm. Well, really what I had in mind was the idea that he could transfer the power to act as President. When he sought to regain that power, even though in writing, there is a question of the validity of his desire to recapture that power, and that would be passed upon by the agent whom he first designated, the, Vice President, because the power is the President's power, the constitutional power.
Mr. RonElls. Well, let me see-----
Senator CARROLL. Perhaps I will simplify it this way. If he seeks to regain the power which ho has given the Vice President, that can be challenged.
, Mr: ltoorms. Well, that is right. He regains it all right. He becomes President. But then the Vice President, with a majority of the Cabinet, can filo a petition with the Congress asking that they consider the inability question. But the President would still continue to act. He would have the authority unless Congress found his inability.
I want to emphasize again, Senator, that I think if there was a provision like this in the Constitution, this contingency would never arise, becanse it never has arisen, and I don't think it ever would, because no Vice President would—and the members of the Cabinet would never assert the inability of the President after he reclaimed the office, unless they were sure he was unable to act. That would destroy them in the public mind.
Secondly, if the President and the people around him realized that if he tried to regain his office when he actually was unable to act, that the Congress might overrule him, they would be most loath to suggest he do that, because they would realize that would be a very odious thing for him, and they would urge him not to do it. So I Oiink the fact that you had power in the Congress, to determine inability in the event of that kind of a dispute, would in my opinion only arise when the issue was clear one way or the other, because no Vice President would ever claim that the President was unable to act if he thought there was any uncertainty about it.
Senator CARROLL. Well, there is considerable logic in that. What I had in mind in the first place, was that when he releases the power, there is no branch or body of the Government that can question that. release.
Mr. ROGERS. That is right..
Senator CARROLL. But when he seeks to regain that power safeguards are proposed. So it is the question of the power of relinquishment as to tie first, and then the President's possible desire to recapture the power later there is this difference between the two provisos. Mr. ROOERS. That is correct,
Senator CARROLL. Had you thought at all in any of your investigations whether or not the President's disability is such that lie should release his power,
PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY	163
'	Mr. Itoons. I am not, sure that I understand your question, Senator.
I am sorry.
. Senator CARROLL. 'Well, supposing the disability is of such a nature that we question whether it is that type of disability. I am just thinking aloud here on this subject. Clearly the President could resign, and by a resignation he confers his powers on the Vice President. That is clearly under the Constitution.
Mr. Booms. Yes, I covered that, I think, before you came in,Sen-ator. I pointed out the argument has been made that a President ,might, just because he was lazy or didn't want to perform the duties of his office for a while—he might temporarily turn them over to the Vice President. But us I pointed out in the statement, if he did that he could be impeached, because that would be a violation of the oath of (Alice. If he improperly said he was unable to act, it would be grounds for impeachpment. I don't think shy President would say he was unable to act"( he was not in fact unable to act. And if he just, wants to get out of the office, he has the power to resign. So I cannot imagine the President would declare his inability if in fact he was not unable to net.
Senator CARROLL. You think, therefore, there is no necessity' for anybody or any branch of the Government to pass upon his ability or lack of ability at the time he makes this transfer of power?
Mr. R OGEES. Well, not more than you already have. You have the power to impeach him—if you think he has declared his inability when in fact he is able to act, then you have the power of impeachment. But I don't think there is any likelihood that the President would do that, because it is so much easier to resign.
Senator CARROLL. That is all, Mr. Chairman.
Senator DIRKSEN. Mr. Attorney General, it runs in my mind—and I am drawing strictly on memory—that the shortest period of time in which a constitutional amendment, has been ratified was 9 months. It has been years since I have examined into it.
Mr. Rooms. I have that in the statement here a little later.
Senator DiaxsEN. Well, the reason I raise the question only is this. In the nature of things, in legislative sessions and State laws being what they are, and the problem of bringing together conventions that might conceivably: ratify a constitutional amendment, a considerable period of time might go by before such an amendment is ratified. Now, in the light of that reality, is it your proposal that the administration would sponsor only one measure here, namely a proposal for a constitutional amendment, and not a statutory proposal to meet any interim or emergency situation ?
Mr. ROGERS. That is correct, Senator.
Senator DIRKSEN. So there would be no proposal for a legislative enactment by Congress to cover this same matter?
Mr. ROGERS. That is correct.
Let me say on that point that the 17th amendment providing for the election of Senators by popular vote was ratified in 131/2 months. To repeal the 18th (Lineament on prohibition by ratification of the 21st amendment, it took less than 10 months. For ratification of the 19th amendment, dealing with women's suffrage, 15 months. The lame duck amendment, 20th amendment, 11 months.
164	PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY
Now, actually the time is not very long. You can get them ratified fairly soon.
The objection I have to the statute--wells there are two objections. Some statutes that have been suggested I think are clearly unconstitutional. Now, I don't suggest you cannot have a stet. se that is constitutional. Some of the statutes that have been suggested I think are constitutional. But they would not eliminate or eradicate the weakness that now exists in the Constitution. In other words, you would still have the same doubt that now exists as to whether the Vice President became President or became Acting President that you now have. And the same doubts that prevailed in Garfleld's administration might prevail in another administration if you merely had a statute, because certainly a statute would not correct the constitutional weakness that exists now.
Senator ICErAuvEn. Is it your feeling, Mr. Rogers, that the necessary and proper clause is not sufficient to validate a statute providing for the resumption by the President of his duties?
Mr. RoGERS. That IS correct.
Senator KEZAIIVER. Do you deal with that?
Mr. ROOERS. I do deal with that.
Seantor KEFAUVER. Very well, I won't ask you about it then. Senator CARROLL. Just one further question along this line. Senator Dirksen gives me this thought.
In this constitutional amendment, if the Congress should act on it, we will say by June of this year, it would probably take another year or longer for this—it could be brought up in the next session of Congress
Mr. ROGERS. I think that is correct.
Senator CARROLL. So we would really be talking about a situation that perhaps would come in 1959 or even the forepart of 1960? Mr. ROGERS. I thing that is correct..
Senator KEFAIII ER. Well, legislatures in most of the States meet in the early part of 1959. Practically all of them do.
You may proceed, Mr. Rogers.
Mr. ROGERS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator KEFAUVER. One point. I am sure that no one would ever suggest that. the powers of the President are divisible. But for the legislative history, it is your feeling that if he declares he is unable to discharge the powers and duties of the office, he cannot say that "I am unable to discharge the powers and duties as Commander in Chief" and keep the rest, or "I am unable to discharge domestic duties" and keep the Commander in Chief. It is all or nothing.
Mr. ROGERS. That is correct.
Senator KEFAUVER. I have never heard anyone seriously propose that.
Mr. RoGERS. I think that probably a few duties that have been assigned to the President by statute might be delegated. But certainly the constitutional powers and duties could not be divided.
Senator KWALIVER. Yes. I just wanted to get clear your opinion about that. You may proceed, Bit, Rogers.
Mr. ROGERS. All right, Mr. Chairman, and members of the committee.
I want to discuss various plans for the creation of a special commission to determine ability. Some people have suggested that the
FRDSIDENTIAL INABILITY	165
commission be empowered to employ physicians and require the President to submit to physical and mental examinations, and there have been different proposals for makeup of the commission and the vote of the commission and so forth. We think these plans should be rejected for a number of reasons.
First, it seems unwise to establish elaborate legal machinery for giving the President, physical and mental examinations. This would give a hostile commission power to harass the President constantly, and risk danger of irresponsible demands for commission action. Not only would provision for such physical and mental examinations be an affront to a President's personal dignity but it would also degrade the presidential office itself.
Second, it seems ill advised to establish complicated procedures which wouldprevent immediate action in case of emergency, because there is a need for continuity in the exercise of Executive power and leadership—especially in time of crisis. Investigations, hearings, findings, and votes of a commission could drag on for days or even weeks and result in a governmental crises, during which no one would have a clear right to exercise Presidential power.
Third, such a commission would be totally unnecessary except where there was a dispute between the President and the Vice President in the executive branch itself. In my opinion such a situation would be most unlikelyt once the principle is constitutionally established that the Vice President's assumption of power is only temporary and the President can resume his power at any time.
I think I have discussed the other matters in that paragraph.
Some constitutional authorities have pointed to the extraordinary ad hoc commission of 16 members set up to decide the disputed Hayes-Tilden election in 1876. This was a desperate remedy for a deb rate situation. In my opinion it forms no basis for a carefully considered long-term constitutional arrangement which will be tested at some indefinite time in the future with unknown personalities involved.
You recall the law that set that commission up was repealed right after, so there was never any constitutional test of it.
Let us now consider some of the objections to the particular composition of proposed commissions.
I think it is now generally agreed that the Supreme Court should not be represented on any Presidential Inability Commission. I think the Chief Justice expressly stated that the other day.
Senator 1CF.F.tuvEn. Yes; his letter is in the record.
Mr. ROGERS. I fully concur in that view, and I think most legal scholars feel it would be unwise to have members of the Court on any such commission.
This leaves Congress and the Cabinet as the logical source from which the members of such a commission would be drawn.
It would appear to be a violation of the doctrine of separation of power for officials of the Congress to participate in any initial decision of Presidential inability. Especially is it the case where under a proposed plan more than a majority of the commission empowered to vote would come from the legislative branch. In effect, it would enable congressional leaders to put the President out of office, and to keep him out, by declaring that he lacks the ability to perform his duties.
166	PRESI DENT! AL INABILITY
The lack of wisdom in any such proposal, I believe, is indicated by considering a converse proposal. Consider for a moment a proposal under which a commission, composed of 4 members of the Cabinet and 1 member either from the House of Representatives or Senate was empowered to look into the alleged inability of Members of the House and Senate.
Any such proposal would promptly and accurately be branded as an unwarranted intrusion by the executive branch into the affairs of the legislative branch. It seems equally unwise to give a committee consisting of a majority of Members of Congress the power to remove the President of the United States.
The framers designed the President as the sole repository of the ExeCutive power of the Nation. Ile and the Vice President—the alternate Executive—are the only two officials to be chosen by all the people. In the time the Presidency has grown 0s the national symbol, a unifying symbol in any time of sirms or crisis. No solution to the problem of temporary disability should dilute the prestige of the Presidency, diminish its stature, or endanger its tenure.
Summarizing my views on the various proposals of a Presidential CoMmission on Inability, I am convinced that this type of scheme is unnecessary, would be unworkable in practice, and would drastically alter the concept of separation of power which hes worked so well throughout our Nation's history.
' • Senator KnrAtivsii. Mr. Rogers, would you mind an interruption at that. point
Mr. Roosas. Not at all, Senator.
Senator ICEFAII VER. I see Mr. Henry Fowler back in the audience, and he testified here the other day very convincingly on this subject matter. His proposal was—if you would rather not discuss it now,
won't. as_It'yon to—the hen& of the agencies, phis the Speaker, plus the PreSident, pro tempore of. the Senate would be the ones to make the. decision.
In other words, he would add those two from Congress.
I pointed out to Mr. Fowler that both the Speaker and the President pro tempore mightliare'some hesitancy in acting on the grounds tJuit,sorneono, might. accuse them of having a personal interest in get-ting.one step closer to the Presidency.
Have you given Mr. FoWler's proposal, any, thought, or do you wish to express vour'opiniOn about it? 
Mr. RooEns. tes, I have; I have not really studied it carefully. Let me speak just for a moment to the question of a statute.
As I said earlier, I think .a statute which would transfer the power of determining inability outside the executive branch or in a corn-iili&4on. part of whose people were outside the executive branch, wound. be unconstitutional.
Now, Ir have also pointed out that there may be statutes that could be ,passed that would not.be' unconstitutional. And I think maybe Atv. Powler's suggestion would fit that category.
Other 'words, as runderstood his proposal, he would leave the, decision in the Vice President 'where it exists now, under the C,ori-stitutiOn, but he would set up, by statute, an advisory group to Advise, iiithrthe Vice President, the ultimate decision being the Vice Presi,-., dent's.
PR1.1;IUF.NTIAL INABILITY
I don't think that would—
Senator Kr.rAuvEa. Yes; that was his proposal.
Mr. Roam. I don't believe that would change the constitutional situation any, but I think it would probably have the effect, as a practical matter, of making certain that the Vice President consulted that group.
Senator KEFAUVER. And of giving him backing for whatever action he might take.
Mr. Rooms. I think, as a practical matter, the Vice President would do that anyway. As I have indicated, I don't believe any Vice President would act to take over the powers and duties of the office unless ho had a great deal of support, because it would destroy him politically, if ho acted in a manner which seemed to be usurping the powers of the office.
In other words, the power has never been that the Vice President acted too hastily. The problem is, How do you get enough support for the Vice President so he will take over the responsibility? He has always hesitated to do it because he was afraid he would be charged with trying to get the Office for good.
Now, getting back to the point of a statute, the only objection I have to a statute is that it might suggest that that was a solution to the problem, and I don't think it would. I don't think it would resolve the doubt that exists today in the Constitution. The doubt is, Is it a temporary or a permanent thing? Now, that cannot be resolved by statute. As long as that doubt exists, I think certainly future administrations will be plagued with this problem.
A Vice President, I think, just as in Garfield's time, would hesitate very much to act if he thought that he was taking over the Office per; manently. And until the Constitution is clarified to make it clear that ho is acting temporarily, then you are going to have a serious constitutional problem every time the President is ill.
So I don't rule out all possibilities of a statute. Maybe a statute would have some public relations value, but it would not have any constitutional value.
Senator D1RKSEN. One difficulty that I see with an advisory group in a matter of such importance as this is that they could wield tremen-. dous influence and yet have no responsibility, if it was only an advisory group, because the ultimate decision would have to be made by somebody else.
Mr. Rooms. That is right. Another thing that would be bad about an advisory group. As I recall, I am not too clear on Mr. Fowler's sugestibn, becatise I have not seen it except through the paper, but I think it provided that two members of an advisory group could call a meeting.
Now, if you can permit 2 or 8people to start a formal proceeding to bring an inability charge against the President, I think it would have a serious adverse effect on the Office, because throughout the history of the country, there has been a great deal of hostility between Congress and the President from time to time.
.1 certainly would be opposed to permitting anyone outside the executive branch to have the power to initiate inability proceedings. Senator CARROLL. Mr. Chairman—Mr. Hruska, go ahead.
Senator HRU8KA. When you make the suggestion that such a proposal would be unconstitutional, is that conclusion based on the idea
168	PRESIDENTIAL INABIUITY
of drawing on officials outside of the executive department to participate in such a Commission's activities? Largely a violation of the concept of the doctrine of separation of powers.
Mr. ROGERS. Yes. Let me see if I can state it a little more simply and directly.
The President—I think most constitutional authorities agree that the power to determine inability rests with the executive branch of the Government. Most authorities agree that the power now rests with the Vice President. Most constitutional authorities agree that the power—that once he determines inability, it is a temporary thing, and the President can take it back any times but there is general agreement that the power now rests in the Vice President.
Now, the necessary and proper clause, as I pointed out here, permits Congress to implement a power which is already provided by the Constitution. In other words, it says that Congress can pass necessary and proper legislation to implement a power that is already granted. But the necessary and proper clause of the Constitution does not give Congress the right to transfer the power.
In other words, if Congress says, "Well, the power is now in the executive branch but we are going to provide,. by statute that we have the power," that would be clearly unconstitutional. ?You cannot transfer the powers granted by the Constitution by statute. You can implement the power and you can permit the power to be exercised, and clarify what the Constitution provides, but you cannot transfer the power, because if you do, you would not have a Constitution.
That would mean that rid could transfer all the power of the judicial branch of the Government and executive branch of the Government by statute. So you vron't have a Constitution.
Senator ITRUSECA. Well, then, the objection to the Commission would lie, on these grounds, whether the Commission were drawn exclusively from the executive department or partly from the executive and partly from the legislative, would it not?
Mr. ROGERS. No; I think that the constitutional argument is stronger if you have everybody outside the executive branch, or if you have a split Commission. But I think if you try to transfer the power from where it now exists in the Vice President to any other group, and it was on a mandatory basis—I mean advisory is something else again—but on a mandatory basis if you transfer the power from where it exists to somebody else, even in the same branch of the Government., I think you would run into constitutional problems.
Senator KEFAUVER. You also run into a constitutional problem on this basis, do you not? If you are wrong about the Vice President, in your understanding of the Constitution, only acting as President, and not in fact becoming President—that is, if he does, in fact become President—then there is nothing in the Constitution which would enable the President to get his Office back. So that the necessary and proper clause does not cover getting the power back if the Vice President did, in fact become President.
Mr. ROGERS. That is correct. In other words, those people who argue, as Daniel Webster did, and as the majority of Garfield's Cabinet did, and as a great many other people have, that the exercise of the powers and duties of the °Mee in fact makes you President—if
PRESIDENTIAL INABILI7."1	189
that is correct, if that is a correct constitutional interpretation, that could not be changed by statute.
Senator KEYAIIVER. Anything else, Mr. Hruska t
Senator HRUSKA. That is all. Thank you.
Senator ICEFAUVER. Senator Carroll.
Senator CARROLL. Do I understand, then that the proposals here you are offering, that no person, no commission, no group has the right to make the determination of the President's disability, except the President himself ?
Mi. Itoozlis. And the Vice President.
Senator CARROLL. Well, initially does the Vice President make such a determination?
Mr. ROGERS. We think, and I think the majority of constitutional authorities think, that the Vice President has that power today, under the Constitution.
Senator CARROLL. How would he initiate it? I am talking now in the first instance of the President's disability. Is it your proposal that the Vice President and a majority of the Cabinet, without the President's consent—
Mr. ROGERS. That is correct.
Senator CARROLL. Well, that clarifies in my mind that, and that raises the next question. Let's assume that the President decided to act on disability. He makes the decision, the designation of the Vice President to act for him. Would there be anything wrong with having the other branches of Government, whether it is the Supreme Court or the Speaker, the majority leader, to be witnesses to the document which gives this—it would be a very important document, the delegation. As long as the President makes the decision, would there be anything wrong with them affixing their signatures as witnesses to the delegation
Mr. ROPERS. No, I don't think there would be anything wrong. I don't quite—
Senator CARROLL. My reason for it is this. This would be a very important document delegating the President's authority, even temporarily. And its impact upon the people, its newnessi.the innova-tion—it would seem to me it would strengthen the President's hand to have the coordinate branches of Government witness what has taken place in a public meeting.
Mr. ROPERS. Well, I would not have any objection to that. As I say, I think the President signs his name to a lot of important documents, and you don't have much problem in establishing his signature. And I don't think you would have any difficulty here establishing the authenticity of his signature. I assume if a President signs such a document, that he would do it in a way that—
Senator CARROLL. It would be a very historic document.
Mr. ROGERS. Yes. He probably would have it properly witnessed. Senator DIRKSEN. You are referring to section 29
Senator CARROLL/I am referring to the first action on the part of . the President' himself, who has the power, and he exercises it..And it is just a question of having the coordinate branches of Government there. I was thinking a little earlier about the possibility of a Presi; dent who is completely paralyzed' and how his statement in writing would be expressed;
470	pitle:SIDENTIAL INABILITY
Mr. Rooms. I might say, Senator, that would he filed with the Secretary of State, as other state documents are filed. And I am sure that the President would have it properly witnessed. I don't believe it is necessary to have other brandies of the Government, witness it. I don't believe you would have a question of authenticity of the signature.
Senator IhiusitA. Isn't. it true to assume if there were a question of paralysis in which the situation would be that ho could not sign his name, isn't it reasonable to assume nny mark or designation ho might make on that paper with the intent it would be his signature wonld be properly witnessed and I suppose recorded in some fashion which would appear likewise in a contemporaneous document.?
Mr. Romans. es, I am sum that that would he the case.
Senator 10ErAuviot. All right, Mr. Rogers. You may proceed.
Mr. Rcxisas. Well, I have really covered to a good extent the next portion of the statement here, why 1 think a constitutional amendment is nece.ssarv.
Professor Sutherland states it quite Ivell
The problem seems to me to Involve a constitutional nmendment • • •. The Founding Fathers wisely wrote into our Constitution the doctrine of separation of powers, from which the country derives many benefits, but which somewhat complicates provision for Presidential inability • • •. However, under the Con-stItotIon as it was well drafted, Congress can no more remove the President than the President can remove n Congressman. An exception, of course, Is the Provision for Impeachment • • 0. To turn over provision for suspending 'or ending his duties to ordinary legislation would alter, In an important respect, the present distribution of governmental Powers between the executive and the legislative branches.
pointed out that those who' feel it can be done rely on the necessary and proper clause of the Constitution and I don't behove that it applies for the masons I have stated. There is quite a lot of authority for that, that the necessary andproper clause does not--I don't think I will repeat what. I said. It is a little more detailed in this statement than
have given it,	.
Senator KEFAVvEn. All this statement will be printed in the record. Mr. ROOF.118. Fine.
It seems dear to me that the necessary and proper clause of the Constitution does not give the Congress power to determine the inability of a President.
I also have discussed the time it has taken constitutional amendments to be passed.
In summary, I think, first, the sounder logic is strongly in favor of a constitutional amendment, and second, if there is this large body of opinion which regards a constitutional amendment as necessary, it would be illogical, to say the least, to deal with this problem by statute, and leave it. in the saw state of uncertainty ns it is in now.
Finally, I should like briefly to comment on the plan under which the Congress would enact a statute and submit an identical constitutional amendment to the States at the same time. There is a precedent for this dual procedure. In 1860 CNigress passed the Civil Rights Act over President Johnson's veto. During debate on the bill in Con.. press, opponents; to it pressed with great force their; arguments to demonstrate that. the bill was unconstitutional. The 14th amendment was adopted to obviate these objections that' threatened; the 'validity of the act.
PRIOSIDI:MTIAL IVAnibirr	111
There isf however, grave danger in this procedure when apPlled td Presidential inability eases. Resort to the constitutional*ainendofe'nc route at the same time that a statute was enacted would be construed as a confession of the unconstitutionality of the statute, and lead to great public tension and unrest if there were any attempt to invoke it in a crisis. Indeed, it might well stir up heated litigation in a nay tonal emergency—the very time that the country can ill afford to await the outcome of protracted litigation, or be divided by it.
For still another reason the 1860 precedent involving civil rights is not an apt one in connection with the Presidential inability issue.
There is no question but that the Federal courts have the jurisdiction to consider the validity of civil-rights statutes and to hold them invalid when they do not meet constitutional standards. In keeping with our traditions, decisions of the courts in cases of this kind which the courts have long determined, would generally be acceptable to the people. But, as several scholars have pointed out, statutes dealing with Presidential inability involve political ques-tions—questions which the courts have steadfastly refused to assume. In the leading case of Colegrovo v. Green, Mr. Justice Frankfurter speaking for the Court stressed once again that it should etay out of political controversies.
The Court said:
Prom the determination of such political issues the Court has traditionally held aloof, It is hostile to a democratic system to involve the Judiciary in the politics of the people. And it Is not less pernicious if such Judicial intervention In an essentially political contest be dressed up In the abstract phrases of the law.
What would the result then be if a statute wore enacted? It would merely invite a long drawn out legal battle at the end of which the Court might decide that it has no power to decide the matter, and that it is bound by the Vice President's decision; or if it did decide it, either the President or Vice President might clsini that its derision Was worthless because the Constitution nevee the Court authority to determine such a case. Thus we would back where we had started from, except that now the confusion, chaos, and dissension among the people would be greater than ever.
In 
other, words, to summarize,I think that would create more confusion than there is today. I unk there is less confusion now than if we pass a statute that could be attacked on the grounds of constitutionality.
If we are ultimately to•rely on a constitutional amendment anyway, it is my considered opinion that we should follow this course exclusively now, and set all doubts to rest for the future. The machinery to be provided to resolve the inability dispute under' any plan, must not. only be such as to achieve a just result, but also to insure its widespread acceptance by-the people. And this Can. only ho accomplished by a constitutional amendments simple on its face, plain for everyone to understand, free of radical change, and so eniieently fair to all parties involved as to have universal appeal.
•	(The complete statement of Mr. Rogers is as follows: )
SFATEURNF OF IIOX. %Olt:LIAM	ROOMS, ATTOB:csx CILXIMAL. OP TIM 1010711P.
&Nip, OX	l*AttnATY	- 
A 'Mattei of 'Orions concemto the pebpie of tiik Ceuritry Is the iirobleni Of7What happens when a President Is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his
172	PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY
office in case of illness or other unexpected emergency. There is agreement that there should be clarification and improvement of our constitutional system relating to such inability. The question is what is the most desirable and appropriate procedure for accomplishing this objective.
After careful study, I believe that action to amend the Constitution is necessary to eliminate uncertainty and to provide for the orderly conduct of Govern-
ment in time of future crises duo to a President's inability to act. The plan which the administration has recommended for favorable consideration by Congress I believe provides a workable and satisfactory solution.
The administration plan is attached as appendix 1.
Strong disagreement prevails concerning the status and tenure of a Vice President during the inability of the President. Distinguished students of the
Constitution have contended that a Vice President would merely net as President
for the duration of the inability. Other respected students of the Constitution have argued that a Vice President would actually become President and replace
the disabled President for the remainder of the term. This difference In opinion respecting a Vice President's status and tenure during a President's inability fully demonstrates the compelling need to remove the existing doubt and confusion once and for all.
Soon after President William Henry Harrison died in 1841, Senator William Allen, of Oltie, objected to establishing the precedent of a Vice President's
becoming President upon the death of the latter, because ho thought that the precedent would complicate the situation In•ihe future when a President became disabled. As Alien indicated, study of the records of the Constitutional Convention shows that a Vice President was not intended to become President under the succession clause, but merely to exercise the powers and duties of the President until his inability was removed.
This connalttee's attention is directed to n chart which is attached to my statement.
Regardless of the intent of the framers of the Constitution, seven Vice Presidents have, upon the death of the President, been recognised as having become the President in fact. As a result of the precedents established whenever a President has died, it seems to be assumed without question that the Vice President becomes President and does not merely set as such when the President dies. This appeared to be Daniel Webster's view at the time of President Harrison's death, I. e., that Vico President John Tyler actually became President. These precedents make it easier to argue that a Vice President supersedes the President whenever be exercises Presidential power. As we will note in a moment in both the Garfield and Wilson cases, the Vice President was not asked to act as President largely because of the fear that he would becomn President and thereby oust the incapacitated incumbent. As a result, the full extent of the disabilities was carefully guarded because of personal loyalty to the disabled President. More important, the public interest could not help but suffer from being deprived of an active President In both cases.
Since Harrison's illness was short, no question of inability was involved. However, President Garfield lingered for eighty days after he was shot on July 2, 1881. During this eighty days he performed only one official act—the signing of an extradition paper. Although hie mind was clear during the first days of his illness he was unconscious and it was reported that he suffered hallucinations during the last days of his Illness. Moreover, he was physically unable to discharge the duties of his office during a substantial part of the eighty days involved. It cannot be seriously contended that there was no important business requiring the President's attention. Actually, officers were unable to perform their duties because the President was unable to commission them. There was a serious crisis in our foreign affairs. Yet the department heads transacted only such routine business as could be transacted without the President's supervision. It was claimed that important questions of public policy which could be decided only by the President were simply ignored.
Equally important, public opinion was sharply divided about the manner in which public business was handled. There was objection to having the affairs of the executive branch managed by the Cabinet, objection that Secretary of State Blaine was guilty of usurping the President's duties, and insistent demands that the Vice President exercise this power and that Secretary Blaine's alleged usurpation be ended immediately.
After Garfield's illness had already dragged on for 00 days, his physicians thought he would recover; bet his convalescence was expected to take another
PRDSIDINTIAL INABILITY	173
00 days. Therefore, the Cabinet considered the possibility of asking Vice President Arthur to act as President during Garfield's recuperation. AU seven Cabinet members agreed on the desirability of having Arthur act as President. Four of the seven, however, thought that Arthur's exercise of Presidential power would actually make him President for the remainder of the term and thereby oust Garfield from office. It was reported that Attorney Wayne MacVeagh shared these views. Consequently, the Cabinet decided that Garfield should not be advised to ask Arthur to act as President without first telling him of this possibility. Therefore, the whole matter was deferred because the physicians feared that the shock caused by such a discussion might result In the President's death. Garfield's death on September 20 made it unnecessary to solve the problem in 1881.
There can be no doubt that President Wilson was actually unable to perform tho duties of his office during some part of the period after his collapse on September 25, 1019, and until the end of his term on March 4, 1021. Numerous domestic and international matters failed to receive his attention. More important, this inability occurred during the Senate debate on the Versailles Treaty.
The exact degree of Wilson's inability is uncertain. Whatever Wilson's condition, Vice President Marshall, the Cabinet and the public were not fully advised concerning it. The President's family, his White house staff, and the Cabinet discharged public business in such manner and by such methods as to them seemed appropriate.
History seems to indicate that Mrs. Wilson and Dr. Cary T. Grayson, the President's physician, played an important part in many questions of public policy.
Soon after Wilson's stroke the Cabinet joined with the White House staff in keeping the Government operating. Secretary of State Lansing called 21 Cabinet meetings to transact executive business. When Wilson heard of these meetings, he accused Lansing of usurping Presidential power and forced him to resign. Wilson seemed to think that the Constitution did nct authorize the Cabinet to act in his absence, with the result the Government business was interrupted during his illness.
Patrick Tumulty, Wilson's secretary, reported that Secretary of State Lensing had suggested that, in view of the Preeldent's inability, they should ask the Vice President to act as President. He quotes himself as saying: "You may rest assured that while Woodrow Wilson Is lying in the White House on the broad of his back I will not be a party to ousting him." Tumulty also reported that, when Lansing resigned, Wilson said: "Tumulty, it is never the wrong time to spike disloyalty. When Lansing sought to oust me, I was upon my back, I am on my feet now and I will not have disloyalty about me."
Because of the belief that the Vice President would actually become President, asking Marshall to act as President during Wilson's inability was viewed as disloyalty. Consequently, Marshall was looked at with antagonism instead of as a person who could lighten the disabled President's burden. Instead of asking Marshall to exercise the powers devolved upon him by the Constitution, they attempted to keep the Government operating in their own way In order to forestall any serious attempt to declare the President's inability.
A study of the Garfield and Wilson cases shows that there is a real need for a means of supplying an active President during periods of Presidential inability. The belief that a Vice President actually becomes President when called to act as such has nullified the constitutional provision for the administration of the Government when a President is incapacitated. In the only two serious cases of Presidential inability to date, the Vice President was not called to act as President because of the fear that he would actually become President and thereby supersede the disabled President for the remainder of the term.
The problem of providing for the exercise of Presidential power during periods of inability would not be solved merely by providing a means by which the inability could be established. Unless the President, his Cabinet, and his other friends are absolutely certain that he may resume his powers after the termination of his inability, they will tend to oppose any attempt to declare the existence of Inability, viewing such a declaration as equivalent to removing the President from office.
With this history to guide us, and with a need for uninterrupted continuity of government, we must conclude that action is vital to solve the problem ot Presidential inability.
22324-58--12
174	PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY
Section 1 confirms the present generally 'accepted' interpretation of the Con-StItution—that in case of removal of the President from office, or his death or resignation, the Vice President shall become President for the unexpired portion Of the then current term. This affirms the result accepted by the Nation seven times in cases of death of a President.
Section 2 of the proposal states that, if a President declares in writing that he Is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office, such powers and duties shall be discharged by the Vice President as Acting President. This section authorizes a President to announce his own inability and allows him to do so, knowing that his powers and duties will be restored to him when he recovers. Section 2 of this proposal also would require the President to make this an-nottucement in writing. The reason for adding this requirement is to preclude a dispute about whether a President actually declared his inability. The existence of a written document will prevent anyone from seriously denying that the President recognized his inability. I believe that section 2 encompasses most of the cases of Presidential inability which are likely to arise. It removes the reason which caused responsible (Immanent officials to fail to act in the Oarileld and Wilson cases.
The only objection I have heard to section 2 is that n President might use this section to shirk his duties and responsibilities. The obvious answer is that a President who used this section to shirk his duties would be breaking his oath to faithfully execute the Office of President and, therefore, would be subject to impeachment for high crimes and misdemeanors. If a President should over become so anxious to be relieved of his duties and responsibilities, he would not need to declare his inability, he could simply resign in conformity with article II of the Constitution.
Section 3 of the plan deals with cases in which the President Is unable or unwilling to declare his own inability. In such cases, the Vice President with the approval of a majority of the President's Cabinet would make the decision.
The Cabinet is the proper body to participate along with the Vice President in declaring a Presidents inability. The Cabinet is an executive body, the President's official family. Its loyalty to the President is generally unquestioned. A decision of this body is least likely to be suspected of enabling n Vice President to usurp powers on the pretext of inability. Moreover, the Cabinet is in a position to know at once whether a President is disabled.
Under section 3, there are several possible courses of action. The Cabinet could notify the Vice President when a majority of that body believed that the President's inability was sufficient to warrant a devolution of presidential power on the Vice President. The Cabinet has always notified the Vice President when a President has died; and section 3 Would extend this custom to the case of inability. Under section 3 the Vice President might take the initiative without the Cabinet's first Inviting him to make the decision. Unlike the provision of the present Constitution, however, section 3 would require approval by a majority of the Cabinet before the Vice President could undertake the exercise of presidential' power.
•	A Vice President who undertook the exercise of presidential power would be assured that his action could not seriously be branded as usurpation because that action was previously approved by the President's own appointees in the Cabinet.
•	In addition to the safeguard provided in section 3 .by the Cabinet's role in the process, section ,contains a second safeguard. It provides that, whenever the President declares in writing that his inability is terminated, the President shall immediately resume the exercise of the powers and duties of his office. , Thus, section 4 does, I think, provide a disabled President with a constitutional guaranty that he can regain the, powers r)f his office without the concurrence of any other official or group if he is of the opinion that his inability has been removed.
. As a practical matter, if the determination ' ,,'residential inability is left where the Constitution places it now—in the Vice President, or if it is placed in the Vice President and Cabinet, as suggested—the Vice President would never venture to assume the duties of the presidency unless it were clear beyond challenge in any quarter that the President was in truth and In fact. actually, disabled from performing the functions of his office. With a constitutional provision spelling out that the Vice President only acts as President Itra ease•of inability,' and d Constitutlehar.provislon granting to the President the right to reassert his Powers'at nef time, the• Vice Presidept as a prattical. political necessity in all probability would secure the apprOral of the Cabinet. of the leaders and a great majority of the Congress, and of a large Segment of
PRIMIDENTIAL INABILITY	175
public opinion before venturing to assume the Presidential duties. On the other hand, with a constitutional provision negating any motive of usurpation in the Vice President by clear language that ho only acts as President for a temporary period, no Vice President would hesitate, as did Vice Presidents Arthur and Marshall in the two most serious examples of this problem, to perform his constitutional duty of serving as the alternate Executive for a temporary period. The President's immediate family and friends would be stripped of any motive to oppose the Vice President, as in Wilson's case, for on regaining his health the President could simply assert his right to the office.
My predecessor was of the opinion that the Federal courts would disclaim jurisdiction in such a case upon the ground that the question presented was political, and that the only remedy was Impeachment. The consensus of °pin-Ion is in agreement with Mr. Brownell that the sole remedy is impeachment where there is a wrongful assertion of authority to exercise the powers and duties of the office. The attempt of a President to perform his duties when he was In fact clearly unable to perform might be classed as a wrongful assertion of authority.
It should be noted, however, that Impeachment proceedings may be delayed if Congress is not in session. Article II, section 3 of the Constitution provides that the President may on "extraordinary Occasions, convene both Houses, or either of them." It is unlikely, however, that a President under attack for attempting to assert the powers while still suffering inability, would convene the Congress to conduct impeachment proceedings against himself. Further study is required to determine how Congress may be convened in the event impeachment proceedings are required in a dispute involving Presidential inability.
Therefore Congress may think it wise to avoid the odium of an impeachment by providing another but a similar process whereby the question of inability could be determined In the unlikely event a President and Vice President were at nn impasse. The administration plan could be modified by the addition to section 4 of such a provision.
Referring to appendix III, this alternate section 4 would still allow the President to resume the functions of his office at any time, but provide for the Immediate action of Congress, whether then in session or not, to resolve the question Of Presidential inability raised in writing by the Vice President supported by a majority of the Cabinet. By making the charge one of inability rather than impeachment for some offense, the necessary proceedings could be concluded in a more appropriate atmosphere. Members of Congress who might be reluctant to impeach the President would not have the same reluctance in removing a President physically unable to perform the duties of his office.
' In my opinion this alternate section 4 would place the President, Vice President, and Congress in exactly the proper relationship to the question of inability. The President could always reassert his power, the Vice President would Regal-esee except in the unfortunate situation where the President had misjudged his trae capacity. In that event Congress would step In and by its consideration of
charge of inability determine the issue. A two-thirds vote of the Senate would determine the existence of a President's inability; a majority vote of both Houses would restore the powers of his office to him. Impeachment would remove the President permanently; a determination of inability would leave to the President an opportunity later to reassume the powers of his office. The difference between the result reached by impeachment And by an inability proceeding would justify' the enactment of the separate inability proceeding, and would render the whole proposed solution more acceptable, I believe, to the public.
Let me stress that the very existence of this Ultimate power in Congress-which is the only power it needs In relation to this question—would in all probability insure that this extreme situation would never arise. No. Vice President would resist a President reasserting his claim to the powers of the office unlessthe President were in fact unable to perform. No President, in fact unable to perform, would be permitted by his family and close persons! counsellork to reassert his claim and precipitate an issue likely to be resolved against hint by 'Congress.
' We. must recognize that In this area as in others, not everything is soluble and riot everything'may be controlled by law. Whatever machinery is adopted, it intik 'not lte.itlide to be used as a vehicle tot hitrassing the President. So long as the determination of Inability Is left:Within the exebutiye brash, either by the President, or'by the Vice President as is now truil, under the Conitituf ion, or by the Vice President and Cabinet under the circumstances proposed by the admin-
178	PRESIDENTIAL INABIIATY
istration, there can be no harassment of the President or diminution of his stature in the eyes of the people. The Vice President is of the President's own party; the Cabinet is of the President's own choice; if there is a provision that the President can reassume the duties of his office at any time, he is safeguarded.
But if we transfer the power of initial determination of inability out of the executive branch, or in some fashion share it with others outside the executive
branch, then the way is opened for a harassment of the President for political and personal motives. We may not always have as President a figure of the national and international stature of President Eisenhower, nor one who has so coin• pletely demonstrated his respect for congress as a coequal branch of govern. meat, whether dominated by his own or the opposition party, as has President Eisenhower. Our solution must contemplate the testing of it, if need be, in circumstances similar to the time of President Johnson and the Reconstruction Congress, when violent personal differences and party controversy would invite Congress to use any power it had to determine Presidential inability as a weapon of harassment—if such a weapon were easily at baud. A possibility of such political harassment could severely impair the Presidency at the very time when assertion of its full power was most needed.
With these guiding principles in mind, let us now examine some other proposals.
First, it seems unwise to establish elaborate legal machinery for giving the President physical and mental examinations. This would give a hostile coin-mission power to harass the President constantly, and risk danger of irresponsible demands for commission action. Not only would provision for such physical and mental examinations be an affront to a President's personal dignity but it would also degrade the presidential office itself.
Second, it seems ill-advised to establish complicated procedures which would prevent immediate action in case of emergency, because there is a need for continuity in the exercise of executive power and leadership, especially in time of crisis. Investigations, hearings, findings, and votes of a commission could drag on for days or even weeks and result in a governmental crisis, during which no one would have a clear right to exercise Presidential power.
Third, such a commission would be totally unnecessary except where there was a dispute between the President and the Vice President in the executive branch itself. In my opinion such a situation would be most unlikely, once the principle is constitutionally established that the Vice President's assumption of power is only temporary and the President can resume his power at any time.
Some constitutional authorities have pointed to the extraordinary ad hoc commission of 15 members set up to decide the disputed Hayes•Tilden election in 1876. This was a desperate remedy for a desperate situation. In my opinion it forms no basis for a carefully considered long term constitutional arrangement which will be tested at some Indefinite time in the future with unknown personalities involved.
Let us now consider some of the objections to the particular composition of proposed commissions.
I think it is now generally agreed that the Supreme Court should not be represented on any Presidential inability commission. This leaves Congress and the Cabinet as the logical source from which the members of such a commission would be drawn.
It would appear to be a violation of the doctrine of separation of powers for officials of the Congress to participate in any initial decision of Presidential inability. Especially is it the case where where under proposed plan more than a majority of the commission empowered to vote would come from the legislative branch. In effect, it would enable Congressional leaders to put the President out of office, and to keep him out, by declaring that he lacks the ability to perform his duties.
The tack of wisdom in any such proposal, I believe, is indicated by considering a converse proposal. Consider for a moment a proposal under which a commission, composed of four members of the Cabinet and one member either from the House of Representatives or Senate was empowered to look into the alleged inability of Members of the House and Senate.
Any such proposal would promptly and accurately be branded as an unwarranted intrusion by the executive branch into the affairs of the legislative branch. It seems equally unwise to give a committee consisting of a majority of Members of Congress the power to remove the President of the United States.
The framers designed the President as the sole repository of the executive power of the Nation. He and the Vice President—the alternate executive—
PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY	177
are the oaly two officials to be chosen by all the people. In time the Presidency has grown as the national symbol, a unifying symbol in any time of stress or crisis. No solution to the problem of temporary disability should dilute the prestige of the Presidency, diminish its stature, or endanger its tenure.
Summarizing my views on the various proposals of a Presidential commission on inability, I am convinced that this type of scheme is unnecessary, would be unworkable In practice, and would drastically alter the concept of separation of power which has worked so well throughout our Nation's history.
In summary, I think, first, the sounder logic is strongly in favor of a constitutional amendment, and second, if there is this large body of opinion which regards a constitutional amendment as necesary, it would be Illogical, to say the least, to deal with this problem by statute, and leave it in the same state of uncertainty as it Is in now.
Finally, I should like briefly to comment on the plan under which the Congress would enact a statute and submit an identical constitutional amendment to the States at the same time. There is a precedent for this dual procedure. In 1886 Congress passed the Civil Rights Act over President Johnson's veto. During debate on the bill in Congress, opponents to it pressed with great force their arguments to demonstrate that the bill was unconstitutional. The 14th amendment was adopted to obviate these objections that threatened the validity of the act.
There is, however, grave danger in this procedure when applied to Presidential inability cases. Resort to the constitutional amendment route at the same time that a statute was enacted would be construed as a confession of the unconstitutionality of the statute, and lead to great public tension and unrest if there were any attempt to invoke it in a crisis. Indeed, it might well stir up heated litigation in a national emergency—the very time that the country can ill afford to await the outcome of protracted litigation, or be divided by it.
For still another reason the 1886 precedent involving civil rights is not an apt one in connection with the Presidential inability issue.
There is no question but that the Federal courts have the jurisdiction to consider the validity of civil rights statutes and to hold them invalid when they do not meet constitutional standards. In keeping with our traditions, decisions .of the courts in cases of this kind which the courts have long determined, would generally be acceptable to the people. But, as severel Scholars have pointed out, statutes dealing with Presidential inability involve political questions—questions which the court have steadfastly refused to assume. In the leading case of
•Colegrooe V. Green, Mr. Justice Frankfurter speaking for the Court stressed
.once again that it should stay out of political controversies.	.
The Court said:
"From the determination of such political issues the court has traditionally held aloof. It is hostile to a democratic system to involve the judiciary in the politics of the people. And it is not less pernicious if suchjudicial intervention in an essentially political contest be dressed up In the abstract phrases of the law."
What would the result then be if a statute were enacted It Would merely Invite a long drawn out legal battle at the end of which the Court might decide it has no power to decide the matter, and that it is bound by the Vice President's
•decision; or ft it did decide it, either the President or Vice President might claim that its decision was worthless because the Constitution never gave the -Court authority to determine such a case. Thee we would be back where we bad started from, except that now the &infusion, chaos and dissension among the people would be greater than ever.
It we are ultimately to rely on a constitutional amendment anyway, it is my considered opinion that we should follow this course exclusively now, and set all doubts to rest for the future. The machinery to be provided to resolve the inability dispute under any plan, must not only be such as to achieve a just result, but also to insure its widespread acceptance by the people. And this can only be accomplished by a constitutional amendment, simple on its face, plain for everyone to understand, tree of raffles' change, and so eminently fair 'to all parties involved as to have universal appeal.
Artettntx
Resolved by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United Metes in Congress (two-thirde of each Roues coheerrifte therein), That in lieu of so much of paragraph six of section 1 of Article II of the Constitution of the
178	PRESIDENTIAL INAIIIIJM'
Untied Stetea as relates to the powers and duties:of. the PresIdeatial office devolving or •the Vice President In the ease of the removal of the President from office, or of his death, resignation, or inability to discharge the powers and duties of the said offiee, the following article Ir proposed as an amendment to the Constitution, which shalt be valid to alt Intents and purposes as part of the Constitution when Willed by the legislatures of three-fourths of the States:
"JOINT filtsOLUTION Proposing an amendment to the Constitution of the United States relating to cases where the ',resident to unable to discharge the powers and duties of his °Mee
HART MIX.—
"SEt,ritIN 1. In ease of the removal of the President from office, or of his (teeth or resignelion, the Vice President shall become President for the Unexpired per-lion of the then current term.
'Svc. 2. If the President shall declare la wilting that be Is unable to (Recharge the powers and (tulles of his mike, such powers and duties shall be discharged by the Me President as Acting President.
"Sec. 3. If the President does not so' declare, the %lee President, If satisfied of the President's Inability, and upon approval In writing of a inejorIty of the heads of executive departments who are members of the President's Cabinet, shall diseherge the powers and duties of the alive as Acting President.
"Sit'. 4. Whenever the President declares hi writing ihnt its inability is terminated, the President shalt forthwith discharge the powers end duties of his office.
"St:e. 5. This Article shell he inoperative unless it shall have been retitled as an amendment to the Constitution by the legislatures of three-fourths of the several states within seven years front the dale of Its submission."
APPF.NDIE II
Arieles as Agreed to by the Convention
Art. X, 1 2: "• • • and in case of his removal as aforesaid,
death, absence, resiguatlon or inability to discharge the powers and duties of his office,
the Vice President shall exercise those powers and duties until another President be chosen, or until the inability of the President be removed.
Art. X, 11: 'The Legislature may de-dare by law what officer of the United States shall act as President In case of the death, resignation or disability of the President and Vice ''resident; (semicolon)
and such Officer shall act accordingly, until such disability be removed; or a President shall be elected." (2 Max Far-rand, Records of The Federal Convention of/787,575,570 (1011 and 1037)4
As Reported by Committee on Style and Finally Adopted
Art, II, 11, ci. 0: "In case of the re: moval of the president from office, or of his death, resignation, or inability to discharge the powers and duties of the said office,
the same shall devolve on the vice-preal: dent, (comma)
and the Congress may by law provide for the case of
removal, death, resignation or inability, both of the president and vice-president, declaring what officer shall then act all president, (comma)
and such officer shall act accordinglY, until the disability be 'removed, or a President shall be elected." (2 id. 598-r
599,	.
APPENDIX III •
(Alternate see. 4)•
Sso. 4 . Whenever the President declares in writing that his inability has terini-nated, the President shall forthwith discharge the powers and duties of his or. e: Provided, however, that If the Vice President and a majority of the heads of executive departments who are members of the President's Cabinet shall signify in writing that the President's Inability has not terminated, thereupon:
Plt}):311)10;TIAL 1NAMIATY	179
(a) The Congress shall forthwith consider the issue of the President's inability In accordance with promlures provided for impeachment, and If the Congress le not in session, shall forthwith convent for this purpose ;
(b) It the House of Itepresentatives shall on record vote charge that the President's inability has not terminated, and the Senate so finds by the concurrence of two thirds of the members present, the powers and duties of the office of President shall be discharged by the Vice President ns Acting President for the remainder of the term, or until Congress by a majority vote of the members 'of both Houses determines that the President's Inability has terminated.
Mr. Itooxits. Mr. Chairman, that completes my statement. Senator ICEFAUVElt. Mr. 'logo* in section 3, you have that—
upon approval In writing of a majority of the heads of the executive departments who are members of the President's Cabinet—
do you think the clause "who are members of the President's Cabinet" should be there, because RS I understand it, the President is not by. the Constitution bound to have any number in his Cabinet? He might just have the Secretary of State and the Secretary of Treasury.
Mr. Rooms. I wouhl agree with that, Senator. I would be agreeable to leaving that out—just leaving it as "majority of heads of the executive depart men ts."
Senator ICi.yntivEn. Any questions of Air. Rogers? Senator Wiley? Senator WIi.i v. I have listened to the discussion, and it sounded very logical. You called attention hero to section 8:
if the President does not so declare, the Vice 'President, if satisfied with the President's inability, and upon apProval In writing of a majority of the beads of the executive departments who are members of the President's Cabinet, shall discharge the powers and duties of the office.
Is it. your opinion that, if this were to become an amendment, you would be making the Vice President's power subject to the approval, or is it the idea that this is simply advisory to the Vice President?
Mr. ROGERS. No, it is the former, Senator. I thhik according to, our present interpretation of the constitution, I think it would be a limitation on the Vice President's power.
Senator WILEY. That is what you want to do about it?
Mr. ROCIERS. That is correct.
Senator Wir.nr. Unless you were to provide that it should be advisory only, you would be taking away from an executive officer power hi order to meet, a situation that may arise, as I see it...
Mr. ROGERS. That is correct, Asa matter of fact, speaking for my-self, Senator, I would not object to elimination of that. .I think that it might be helpful to the Vice President to have it in there, because I think it would give him support. And I think that, as long as it was clear that this was a temporary thing, then the Cabinet would support the Vice President; just as they did in Garfield's time. And I think
they would in any case.	,
'In other' words, I. cannot imagine a Vice President .assuming the
powers' and duties of the office if the Cabinet opposed him.' - Senator ,ThirssEif, Well, the whole purpose is to fortify him and
dissipate the fear' that amse in the Garfield case and the Wilson ram Mr. ROGERS. That is co?rect, Senator.
Senator KV:MINER. PenatOr:DirkSell;	- •
Senator WILEY. May just ask one other question' that bothers Me When President Wilson was stricken, there was considerable dis-
180	PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY
ous:sion. We know that a man may be physically disabled, but mentally able. Or vice versa—mentally disabled and apparently physically able. You can see that in the asylums. But, to return to the current 1Droblem: there is no definition of the President's inability. As the situation is now, it devolves upon the Vice President to define that term. If this amendment were to become part of the Constitution, you could have a great deal of discussion among a number of officials as to what the meaning of "President's inability" is. In other words, it could not be one man's decision. That is what I am getting at. And it may be getting into a situation which involves personal interest..
Now, you had that Wilson situation. Some said he was disabled and some said he was not. Some said that he, through his wife, carried on, and so forth. We hope we will never have to meet that situation. But I think it is important to get the phraseology clarified, so we will know what. we are talking about.
Carry on, sir.
Senator DIREBEN. Do you have in mind reciting in greater detail in section 8 how the inability shall be determined/
Senator Wn,Er. No, I don't know. I was just trying to get it, clear that that phase presented a vast field of uncertainty.
Mr. ROGERS. That is correct, Senator. I think, though, that the framers of the Constitution were wise in using that language. We have not changed that language any, because I think it depends on all the circumstances, and I don't think you could define it in a constitutional provision. The only change that this makes in the Constitution is to make it clear that it is temporary and not permanent.
In other words, the language is just the same insofar as inability is concerned—it is just the same as it is now.
Senator WILEY. I realize that. But I also realize now that it is one man's decision virtually at present.
Mr. Roams. That is correct.
Senator Wumr. Now, what you propose is to leave it up to the majority of the heads of the executive departments I
Mr. ROGERS. And the Vice President..
Senator WILEY. Well, a majority has to approve, according to this. Mr. ROGERS. That is correct.
Senator WILEY. And that, to me, is where you are running into the snag. But youalways have to have snags, I guess.
Mr. ROGERS. Well, as I have said, Senator, I personally would not be opposed to leaving that out of the constitutional provision, because I think, as a practical matter, any Vice President would insist on getting the SU rt of the Cabinet.
senator " mers So do I. In an hypothetical situation, exercise of unusual authority often goes to a man's head, and inflates
Mr. ROGERS. Well, as long as it is temporary, and the President could reassert his ability to perform, I don't think there would be much temptation on the part of the Vice President to take over the Powell; and duties of the office, unless he was absolutely sure that tht; President was unable to act.
Senator CARROLL. Will the Senator yield.
Row soon could the President reassert that?
PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY	181
Mr. ROGBRS. I think he could reassert it right away.
Senator CARROLL. And when he reasserted that, what would be the next step, in your proposal I
Mr. ROGRRS. Well, as I say
Senator CARROLL. Would that immediately divest the Vice President?
. Mr. ROGIIRS. Yes, sir.
Senator DIRKSEN. The language there is "forthwith."
Senator CARROLL.. Now; what is the next step after that?
Mr. ROORRS. Well, I pointed out here in the statement that the only step that could be taken then would be if the Vice President and the majority of the Cabinet still felt the President was unable to act, they then could file an inabilty petition with Congress, and Congress would immediately act on that, and make the determination.
Senator Hausixe. But that would be only under the alternative section 4 I
Mr. ROGERS. That is correct. Now, what I have also pointed out, Senator, is that I don't think that would ever happen, just because of the practical realities of the thing. No Vice President is going to say the President is unable to act unless he is sure he is right and has a lot of popular support. And that is not the problem. The problem is how to get him to act. It is not to prevent him from acting.
Certainly no Vice President would ever assert the inability of the President unless he was sure that the President was unable to act.
Now, once the Vice President took over the powers and duties of the office temporarily, I cannot imagine the President reasserting his ability to act  unless he was able to act, because he would then know that, if he did that, Congress could overrule him. And the Vice President would not want to assert the inability of the President unless he was sure he was unable to act, because it would disgrace and destroy him. And no President would want to assert his ability to act, and his friends and family won't let him, unless he was able to act. And if he was not able to act, and Congress said so, he would be disgraced.
So, as apractical matter, unless you had the final authority in the Congress, in the unlikely event yonhad that conflict between the President and the Vice president, I do not think you would ever have the conflict. And I think unless you do have some final authority like that, there is an extreme contingency that might arise. You might have a President who was mentally incompetent. But the Vice President and the majority of the Cabinet would never file an inability petition in Congress Unless they were sure they were going to win.
Senator Cannot.t.. What vote would be necessary to sustain the Vice President?
Mr. ROGERS. The same, as an impeachment., It is analogous to im-peachment—a majority of the House and two-thirds of the Senate.
Senator CARROLL. The reason I was bringing this out is the question of power politics.
Sujiposing it arose, where there was this conflict between the Vice President and the President and the Cabinet threw in with the Vice President, and 'they took this action, by this, majority vote. The President could then counter forthwith, and then this precipitates the
182	PRESIDENTIAL INAtubrry
nal legislative situation Where the Congress, by tWO:thirds vote;has 16sustMti the Vire President and the Cabinet.
Is that it in substance)/ I mean if there is a ruling on the President's inability ?
Mr. ItodEas. Wall, as x soitI can't iniagine the Vico President and the majority of the Cabinet bringing that proceeding unless they wore sure they werelight. The only situation where that would occur is if you had a mentalltiheoMpetent'Vice President and mentally incompetent Cabinet, 'In Other words, I can't imagine a Vice President. and 'the members of the President's own Cabinet asserting his inability and 'asking eongress to deride' it, unless they knew he Was unable to act. Senator' CARROLL. Ina you do, then, is finally come back to the sCOngress to take positive action in support of the position of the Vice
President. and the Cabinet.	• •
Ito(mas. In the very unlikely event that would ever arise.
Senator Cmutom. I know. But nevertheless it is a constitutional
safeguard.
Mr: RonfIRS. That is correct.
•	Mutter CAnitot,i,. So by setting up that constitutional safeguard, it takes me back• to my lies? question : should we set up any other roiiktitutional safeguard on the original act of the PreSident hini-self ?
Mr. Room. I do not think it is necessary, but I would not have any objections to it.
:;mater CARROLL. There would not be any reason why the Congress could not pass upon it in the first instance.
Senator REMITTER. You mean the validity of the signature?
Senator CARROLL. The validity of the signature itself. In other words, you have two things, as I understand it; from your testimon and T assure you I am not a student of this subject., and I am pig sort of shooting from the hip on this. But the question arises first when the President says, "I am disabled and I cannot. fulfill the functions of m Office and I want to transfer it temporarily to the Vice
President, who becomes!	an Acting President.
Now, if it should require congressional approval of such an unprecedented act, there would be nothing wrong with it, I assume. It might slow down the process some? but- there would be nothing wrong with it. Because in the second instance, if the Vice President and the Cabinet. try to assert a power, which sonic of you con-
•stitutional lawyers say renoses in the Vice President, to make it permanent, if there is objection on the. part of the disabled President., it has to be done by two•thirds of the Senate. That is an impeachment.
Well, I merely offer the suggestion for you to think about. I will
not belabor the point.	.
Senator ICEM UV R. Senator Musks.
Senator Ilau81c4., Mr. Cheirman, .1 should like, to'say that I want
commend the Attorney General for coming in here With this very Rlendid 'statement.: I. think he had cleared up ti good many things in. a very, logical way which otherwise rould lioe misunderstood and probably the emphasis placed-in the wrong 'place.'
I do know that since the discussion of this subject has arisen, that in my many discussions of it with laymen and lawyers' groups and
	PRESIMITLAL • INAMIATY	188
lawyers themselves, that there halt:been. a. tendency to make the mistake of placing emphasis 'upon the • difficulty ,of determining, .disl ability, . And ‘I think it is quite clear, from • a consideration of the historical examples, that that, isliot the problem.
Mr. Rooms. 'flint is correct.
. Senator Ihivana.. Likewise, there is the second mistake commonly made that the problem is to slow up the Vice President from, assurrif in duties, whereas that is contrary, again, to historical records.
. Now, I would 'like to ask this question, Mr. Attorney General:
You have an appendix I, Section 4, ifhich, of course, is different from the alternate section 4. I should like to ask=you whether 'you have any preference as between the• two, or if you ivotiltU have any disposition to say that one would be preferable to the other' In the light of your study of this entire subject.
Rooms. Yes, sir. I prefer the alternate section for three reasons:
•	Ono, •the impeachment proceeding does not provide a method of calling Congress in session when they are out of session.
' Senator Hnusna. I understand the three points Avhich you have advanced.
•	• Mr. Rooms. Secondly, an impeachment, would 'be it permanent act, and the President could never get back in office, even if he recovered his ability to act.
And so far those two reasons and the other reason I mentioned, I,
myself, prefer this al termite sect ion.	L '
Senator Havana. I understand and I appreciated the reasons which you had assigned, but I did not, know you had gone to the point of saying you preferred the one over the other.
Mr. Rooxas. Yes. I submitted them this way because appendix I is the proposal that Mr. Brownell made in the House, and -I think it is the original proposal of the Department. And on reconsideration,
particularl in	of	of e obections	were mae to
the impeachment,the light proceeding,some we haveth reconjsideredtthat	that
we	I think that
we all feel that the alternate section is better. I think it removes the objections that have been made to the impeachment proceeding. •
•	SenatorTInusita. That is all T have, Mr. Chairman.
Senator ICEmunn. Senator Dirksen.
Senator DIRISEN. Mr. Rogers, in summary we are in this position:
In your considered opinion, the enactment of a statute will not solve
this problem, or resolve the confusion.
Mr.:Rooms. That is correct.
Senator DIRKSEN. Therefore,
the constitutional amendment, is not
only preferable, but ought to beptiniued separately and alone, and not
in conjunction with a statutory remedy.	•
thst is correct, Senator.•	•
.	,
' Senator Mum%	2,• with respect, to ,(hese prOposalethstate
now pending ,before the coinnniftee,,some Of Well invoke theycitvers of the' Siipreme'e,o0t'er the 'presence of the Chief. jiictle6 Presiding' iitheiit, a vote, that those would-be fatalen, the'ground that, 'firat, it does violate, in tour judgment, the eeparation of.powers and; secondly, The Supreme Court has already 'recognized that in the Statement It put in the. record.
Mr. Rooms: flint is Corte ef
184	PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY
Senator DIEMEN. No. 8, with respect to those proposals' pending before us, formally. or otherwise—and there are some, as the letter from President Hoover and the letter from President Truman, which are not formalized in bills—they would be equally fatal on the ground that again the separated powers are violated because there it imposes a dal, on Congress and also confers an authority on Members of Congress m the legislative division.
Mr. Rooms. That is correct.
Senator DIRESBN. So out of all it is your opinion that this matter is going to have to be resolved wholly within The executive branch.
Mr. ROOKR84 Correct. -	•
Senator DDIKEIEN. Through the Vice President and heads of the• executive departments, or whoever else in the executive departments that Congress might add. But. in any event, limited exclusively to• the executive branch.
Mr. Rooms. That is correct, Senator.
Senator KEFAUVER. Mr. Rogers, just 1 or 2 questions for the record' and for the legislative history.
Mr. ROGERS. Just to answer the last question—you realize the initial' decision, with the proviso that if the two executive heads disagree,. they go through this procedure—then Congress has the ultimate authority, but not the initial authority.
Senator DIRKEMN. Yes.
Senator Kr:OM:MR. Article II, section 1, clause 0 gives the power for the passage  of the succession net. which we now have, of course. It. is not intended that this aniendment would take away or alter the• right. of Congress to deal with the problem of succession, where both the President and the Vice President are unable to act or are dead.
Mr..Rootas.. Not at all, Senator. It would not affect that. at all.
Senator ICitrAvvra. Now, the next question is this. In the alternate section 4, how do you visualire Congress would be called into session? And if tie Congress is not in session, shall it forthwith convene for this purpose? 'Is it your idea that this gives the Speaker and the. President pro tempore or somebody the power to call Congress?
Mr. ROOP.R8: I think it would be automatic with the filin of the-writing. In other words, once the Vice President. and the majority of the Cabinet file the inability petition, then tthink Congress would automatically be convened under the constitutional provision.
Senntor ICErAtivra. All right.
Now, the next question is on subsection (b) of section 4—who presides at a hearing ,before the Senate on the question of disability? Would it be contemplated that the Chief Justice of the United States would preside?
Mr. Rooms. I think it would be just like an imkAohment proceeding. I tried to make it &ear in my statement tjiat the same rules as for impeachment would apply. In other words, it is analogous to .7mpeachinc*, and the theory is the same,--to give Congress the ulti-
mate ank hority when this	arises, lust as you do inimpeach-
ment, And' all the procedures would be the same, except you. would automatically -convene Congress and it would be temporary rather than permanent,
Senator ICEFAVVER. The procedures are the same, but the issue is. different.
PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY	185
Mr. RODER& That is right.
Senator KEFAUVER. And then the presiding of the Chief Justice, I
assume 
, would automatically disqualify him in case of a court test about the matter.
Mr. Rooms. That is correct, sir.
Senator KEFAUVER. Well, Mr. Rogers, I want to join in complimenting you on a very scholarly presentation. You have developed this matter logically and well. Whether we agree with all parts of your suggestions or discussions or not, we will give it a great deal of attention. We appreciate your coming here today.
Mr. RORER& I appreciate your courtesy and the courtesy of the subcommittee.
Senator KEFAUVER. Our next session is on the 28th of February, at which time wo shall hear Mr. Charles Rhyne, president of the American Bar Association.
(Whereupon, at 4:10 p. m. the subcommittee was recessed to reconvene, at time to be designated, on Friday, February 28, 1958.)
'.1s'rA'"1	20!':
PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY
FRIDAY, FEBRUARY 28, 1958
UNITED STATES SENATE',
SUBCOMMITTEE ON CONSTITUTIONAL! AMENDMENTS
'OP TUE COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY,
Waahington, D. C .
The subcommittee met pursuant to recess, at 10 a. m., in room 47, Senate Office Building, lion. Estes Kefauver (chairman of, the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Senators liefauver (presiding), Wiley, Dirksen.
Also present: Wayne H. Smithey, counsel, and Richard F. Warn-bach, clerk to the subcommittee.
Senator KErAuvrit. The subcommittee will come to order.
the subcommittee will be
w
is morning to have with us
an Bar Association, Charles S.
t- admiration and • p	or many yea.
of knowing	Rhy ie as a	yer and as
h	self,o • public matte
the	• untr • • s	on the
v'e	• testi on will ca
t	nanitia
y ngep p
•
hi
Made a	0
fer
	N. O.,	23, 19 ; s.. Sy&
	e U., 1	29, 1! 4 d. ; LL.B.,
pt. 16 032; chi .ren—Marr bar 937, and 81 ce practiced,
1	w Oftlee	professorial
sel Comn. Jud. . house of depe. r cons., 1954-56; chmn. Internet and. airman, council mem.; 45), Fed., Communications
and Federal Power Coma., D. O.	dir. 194574k.chmn.program
and other coma.) bar assns., Am. Judicature Soc.,1054-55), Am. Law Inst., Am. Soc. Internat. Law, Nat. Aero. Assn. (dif.-1945-47), Virtsaidngton. Bd. Trade, Duke U. Alumni Assn. (chmn. net, council 1955-56), Delta Theta Phl, Order of Coif, Omicron Delta Kappa,,ScrIbes. Clubs: University, National Press, Barristers, Congressional, Aero. Author: Civil Aeronautics Act, Annotated, 1939; Airports and the Courts, 1044; Labor Unions and Municipal
187
Senator ,Dirksen and o
here shortly.
We arelonor
dent of the An
I have had
"thti privileg
public citi
he is one
have be
weight.
Mr.
Bar A
plimen
I ha
backgr
(The
Chart Bylvanus hyp , lawye neyham S. and Mar (Wilson) R.; George W hington U., 1937; m. S
Margaret,	lliam Sylvanus. in Washingt ; gen. coon
lectr. on aviat n law Gee	o 1 U.,	I. ; gen. co
and Congi. Sala es, 1953-54. Mew.	ernat. (patron, me
Iola-56). Am. (h.:.f.4:els. 1944—; chmn. rules and cal chmn Como. on ae . aw 1046-43, 51-54, drat i
comparative law sect.	9, sec. 1st end 211. VIe.
chmn. UN com; nat. chmn.	Bar Conf.
n who ha pr ft he abl men re us t ay.. His
hyne, I believe, i iation. He was to hiin,
e a detai d bio und, whi Wil iographi al site
•
•
•
mitted Nat. Inst.
p-members-
•
I •	s
b.
Ito i
01
ent D
D. unici
idea of the • sly, wh is a
Mr.	e's act ivi
the record at this ws:)
I ,.
a very able presi-yne, foir whom I have had interested think bject we great
erica]) t.com-
es an int.
188	PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY
Employee Law, 1048; Aviation Accident Law, 1047; Airport Lease and Conces-aion Agreements, 1918; cases on Aviation Law, 1050; The Law of Municipal Contracts, 1052. Editor: Municipalities and Law in Action, 1038-52, NIMLO Municipal Law Rev., 1052—, Municipal Law Jour., 1940—, MunicIpal Law Court Decisions, 1042—, Municipal Ordinance Rev., 1953—. Author articles In field. Home: 2921 Foshan Road, Washington 7. Office: 728 Jackson Place, Washing. ton, D. 0.
Senator KEFAUVER. We are glad to have you with us, Mr. Rhyne. You have a statement which will be printed in full in the record. You can read it or summarize it or handle the matter as you wish.
Mr. Rityrni. Thank you very much, Senator. I especially appre-
ciate the kind and very undeserved words with which you have presented me.
Senator ICErAuvzit. Before we start, Mr. Rhyne, you are accompanied by your administrative assistant in the American bar activities. Will you introduce him?
Mr. RHYNE. Ile is Charles A. Dukes, Jr., who is a member of the Bar of the District of Columbia, and a member of my law firm, and this year he is devoting all of his time to helping me in connection with my duties as president of the American I3ar Association.
Senator KEFAUVER. We are glad to have you here, Mr. Dukes.
Mr. DUKES. Thank you.
Mr. RHYNE. I would like to say that I have known the chairman of this subcommittee for some 20 years, or probably more, and I certainly have great admiration andrespect for him, and for the tremerAnus public service ho has rendered to his native Tennessee and to our Nation.
Senator KEFAUVER. That is appreciated very much, Mr. Rhyne.
STATEMENT OF CHARLES S. RHYNE, PRESIDENT, AMERICAN BAR
ASSOCIATION
Mr. RHYNE. I do have a written statement. I think I will present it in that form, Mr. Chairman.
•Mr. Chairman and members of the subcommittee, I welcome this opportunity to present my views on this extremely vital problem of
Presidential inability. I	been pleased to note the nonpartisan approach you have taken to this pFobleni, and the full and deliberate treatment which is being given the important issues involved. Though certainly I do•not pretend to be an expert on this matter, I have a great interest in common with all Americans in its resolution. While
serving as General Counsel to the Federal Commission on Judicial and Congressional Salaries, I did have occasion to study the duties and responsibilities of the office of Vice President rather closely, and gave some thought to this matter in that connection at that time.
The American Bar Associaion has not considered or taken an official position on the issues now before this subcommittee. I am here today in response to Senator Kefauver's invitation to present my personal views. So nothing I say can be attribted to the association or any
other member thereof.
I. THE NEED FOR OHANOE
•
Recent recurrent periods of illness suffered by President Eisenhower have created a wave of national concern over the present constitu-
PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY	189
tional .provision pertaining to Presidential disability. The existing provision is:
In case of the removal of the President from office or of his death, resigna• tion, or Inability to discharge the powers and duties of the said office, the same shall devolve on the Vice President, and the Congress may by law provide for the case of removal, death, resignation, or Inability, both of the President and Vice President, declaring what officer shall then act as President and such officer shall act accordingly until the disability be removed, or a President shall be elected (United States Constitution, art. II, sec. 1, clause 0).
The fear is that the above provision is not sufficiently clear as to how, when, for how long and under exactly, what conditions the President is to he replaced for inability.A brief survey of our Nation's history would appear to support this fear, despite the fact that no serious disaster has ever occurred as a result of the prevailing uncertainty.
As early as 1841, upon the succession of John Tyler to the Presidency, objections were voiced to establishing the precedent of the Vice President becoming President upon the latter's death for fear that complications might arise in the future in the event of Presidential inability. Certainly the possibility of Presidential disablity is clearly evidenced by history. On seven occasions the Vice President has been required to fill tin unexpired Presidential term. Three of these men, Andrew Johnson, John Tyler and Harry S. Truman, served 3 years and 11 months of that term. Chester A. Arthur and Theodore Roosevelt served 31/2 years each. Millard Fillmore and John Calvin Coolidge served over 21/2 years. In each instance, it is apparent that had history been only slightly different there could have been a protracted period of Presidential disability.
There have been two historical periods of actual Presidential disability. The first was in 1881 during the final illness of President Garfield. For 80 days he performed only one official act, the signing of an extradition paper. Daily physicians' reports clearly indicated his inability to perform the duties of his office. During this time foreign relations were completely neglected and only very routine matters were handled. There was great dispute over whether the powers and duties of the President could be only temporarily devolved on the Vice President. President Garfield's death resolved the need to determine the issue and nothing was done; but one point stood out. The constitutional provision upon Presidential disability was a matter of great uncertainty.
When President `Nilson fell ill in 1919, the situation was even more serious. For almost 11/2 years,
he was unable to function except periodically. During the special session of the 66th Congress, 28 acts become law owing to the President's failure to pass on them within the requisite 10 days. The President did not meet his Cabinet for 8 months during this illness. Many students of the period agree that public business in general and the fate of the Versailles Treaty in particular were affected by the President's inability. But aside from any conclusion as to the seriousness of this period of disability, it cannot be denied that existing law was inadequate to handle the situation. This same uncertainty which has restricted and hindered action throughout history still exists today.
In this critical era in which we live, with cold war in full swing and hot war hovering in the shadows, it is more than ever necessary
22324-58-----18
190	I:PI ENTIAls INABILITY
that exeentive leadership he fit one man and that this man be ready to act upon n moment's notice. Large areas of our Nation could be destroyed in a matter of minutes, and it is vital to our security to have a President ready to respond to eineqtency instantly. I note that President Eisenhower has announced that lie has taken care of his own situnt ion. lint a matter of such paramount importance should not be loft to informal arrang-t'meats, and the President himself has reeommended permanent clarification of our legal provision for ban-
tiling Prnsitlent lel inability.
1 believe President Eisenhower has performed a kweat public WV-
ice in revealing the existence of his understanding with Vice President, Nixon on this important subject. Our people are greatly concerned over thisjiroblem of Presidential disability, and the President's statement wilt reassure them that no lapse twill ()Ivor in the exorcise of
Presidential power and that nil emergencies will be met. It. will end some of the uneasy feeling here and abroad which it necessary discussion of this important problem has created and serves as a stopgap until a permanent solution can he achieved.
•With respect to secrecy, I did not read the President's comment as denying the public the details. I feel sure that at the proper time mud place he will reveal the understanding in full.
Not only our people, but all the people of the free world have n vital stake in the Presidency, as it is the most important, office in the world. I am certain they will not, lx' left in uncertainty by the President.
The Prtksident should be commended for his foresight and candor. What the President has done is in the public interest and along the lines of the objectives of the plan under consideration by this subcommittee.
H. HOW THE cHANOE SHOULD BE ACCOMpLiSHED
Having recognized the historical background, the present importance of the problem, and statutory law to provide n solution, T now examine the means by which a. solution may be provided. Here there have been two views: (1) That a change should be accomplished simply by passage of a law by Congress under the existing constitutional framework, and (2) that a change should be accomplished by constitutional amendment, possibly implemented by congressional statute.
Many who expound the latter view believe that passage of a statute alone would be violative of the existing Constitution, since nowhere is Congrm specifically given the power to act in this matter. Furthermore, they contend that congressional action to remove the Chief Executive would be contrary to the historical separation of powers between the legislative and executive branches of the Government as tacitly provided for in the Constitution.
Those who support the view that congressional action alone is sufficient generally find authority for such action in the "necessary and proper" clause of the Constitution which provides as follows :
The Congress shall have power * • • To make all laws which shall be necessary and proper for carrying into execution the foregoing powers, and all other powers vested by this Constitution in the Government of the United States. or in any department of officer thereof (United States Constitution, art. I, sec. 8, clause 18).
I'llE.SIDI•NTIAl. INABILITY	191
Relying upon the latter part of this clause, they find authority for the Congress to enact a law which is necessary and proper for carrying into execution the powers vested hi the executive department in the event of the disability of the Chief Executive Officer.
Both views can claim support from segments of the public, legal scholars R1141 Members of the Congress who are among our most able authorities on constitutional law. I am informed that both views have found support among the eminent authorities who have already testified as witnesses in this hearing.
I am convinced of only one thing, and that is that there is no clear answer to the constitutional power problem. 1 do not think that the Supremo Court. has decided the issue in cases such as United Mate* v.
Harris (100 U. S. 029	I
(1883)) and famati v. Colorado (208 U. 8.411 (1007)),, which are sometimes cited. Both of these state the general propos!! um that Congress can legislate only on subjects where.power to legislate has been given by the Constitution. The norm case decided that, the Constitution gave Congress no power to make it a criminal offense for private persons to conspire to deprive someone of equal protection. The Kansas case decided that the Constitution gave Congress no power to reclaim arid lands not the property of the United States. Neither ease decided whether the Constitution gives Congress the power to provide for a procedure for determining Presidential disability and the power to transfer Presidential power to a now executive in the event of such disability.
Moreover, oven if decision on this point could be read into the language of the cases, it would still not provide absolute certainty. The Supreme Court has been known to change its mind, iarticularly where its previous decisions tire not precisely on the point involved. The constitutional validity of a statute on Presidential disability can be tested only upon occurrence of such a disability—a time which I submit would be too late.
The gravity of the disability problem and the uncertainty over the question of the constitutional validityof a congressional statute on Presidential disability absent a constitutional amendment is persuasive to me of the necessity of acting by constitutional amendment. The certainty of a constitutional amendment, I believe, fully warrants the lengthy. process involved.
I recognize that amending our Constitution is a very serious matter. The fact that so few amendments have been adopted demonstrates the people of our country so believe. The office of President of the United States is the most important office in the free world. People all over the world are watching every action and suggestion here. We must approach this problem with these considerations in mind. The seriousness and importance of the matter lends weight to the view that action should be by constitutional amendment. When one adds the substantial constitutional doubt created by the controversy over the proposed statutory plan increased substance is given to the constitutional amendment plan.
Again, I stress that this matter of constitutional amendment is one of necessity, to remove all possible doubts, rather than that those who sincerely believe that a statute alone would be sufficient are wrong beyond all doubt. The issue is not so clearly one-sided either way. But the only way to avoid adding uncertainty upon uncertainty is to , act through constitutional amendment, with the amendment so crystal clear that all who run can read and understand.
192	PRESIDENTIAL INAMIATY
Now, having stated my preference for a change by constitutional amendment, let inc sketch broadly the scope of that amendment. First, I would make it more than a mere authorization to Congress to act. This abbreviated type of amendment leaves the way open for partisan legislative interference with the Executive---a violation of the spirit behind the constitutional separation of powers.
But our Constitution, including its amendments, is written in general language, and I would be loath to see a great deal of extraneous detail included in this amendment. While Congress should not be given a blank check to legislate on Presidential disability it should be empowered to implement the amendment by legislation which spells out the details of pmeeduro following the broad outlines laid out in the amendment.
HT. WHAT THE CHANGE 81tOULII BE
I shall now state my own views as to the procedural outlines which should bo contained in the amendment, breaking them roughly into the procedure for initiation of proceedigs, procedure for determination of disability, and procedure for reinstating the President after the disability has ceased to exist.
Initiation of proceedings for determination of the President's inability: Many learned and workably acceptable proposals have been made concerning how the proceedings to determine a President's inability should be initiated.
If the President deems himself incompetent., as a practical matter, he is the ono to initiate the proceedings for his removal which may either be permanent under our existing Constitution or temporary under various proposals now before this committee. This provision need not be included in the amend.nent proper. It is good commonsense.
As to voluntary removal in situations where the President is himself incapable of making a declaration of inability or he refuses to declare his inability,
the various•proposals as to who should initiate a series of events that would ultimately result in an Acting President are many and mention virtually all of our highest Government officials. They include proposals that Congress by concurrent resolution be permitted to initiate the proceedings. Another would authorize the Vice President and other persons authorized by Congress. Various advisory councils have been proposed. The Cabinet alone and the Cabinet and Vice President were suggested.Some have proposed that Congress, the Cabinet, and the Vice President should allhave this power. Several proposals obviate the necessity of requiring a formal initiation of these grave proceedings by •any one individual or group if Presidential inability is self-evident and generally known.
I personally feel that the Vice President would be the logical person to initiate such proceedings. The views of the Cbinet,' the Congress, and the 'others'would, of course, be taken under advisement by any American elevated to the increasingly important office of Vice President', but the decision should be his as to whether the proceedings should be started.
Procedure for determining .that the inability-exists: I have suggested that the Vice President initiate proceedings to determine in-
,
PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY	. 198
ability. That leaves open the question of who should decide the question once it has been raised by the Vice President. Determining
that an inability exists involves two processerb an inquirer and a
method. The latter, or the "how" of determining inability, is so distinct a process that it will be given separate consideration. This,
it is hoped, will withdraw the process of how ono should determine inability from the variety of opinions centering around which of our officials should determine inability.
Unquestionably, who should determine Presidentiil inability is ono of the most controversial, hotly debated issues of constitutional law of our generation. The officials and agencies proposed to determine inability are as many and all-inclusive as those proposed in the prior section dealing with initiation of the procedure. The proposals msy be summarized as follows:
1. Let the President decide. Lotting the President decide his own inability, without more, imposes a responsibility with too many uncertainties and is in reality our current situation. No man can really judge himself. There may be instances when a President would think lie is capable of performing his duties when everyone else would conclude the opposite. There may also be Presidents who with an abundance of patriotism and love for their country would seek to step aside to avoid criticism when undue pressure is placed upon them with respect to their health.
9. Let the Vice President decide. This plan would cast a tremendous responsibility upon a Vice President. He would decide whether to make himself Act:ng President. Such a responsibility understandably crated hesitation in a Vice President to act, when he should act, for fear of being criticized unjustly as a usurper or for acting disloyalty or improperly, and at the same time would allow an ambitious Vice President to seize power under circumstances when he should no do so. This plan could envelop an Acting President and the office of President in such controversy and debate as to diminish the Acting President's effectiveness and possibly make the whole Nation and the free world suffer irreparable harm.
The proposal that would permit the Vice President to succeed if he and the Cabinet were satisfied that the President was disabled in effect requires the consent of the Vice President for such a Cabinet determination.
3. Commission representing executive, legislative, and judicial branches. The objections to this plan are that the judiciary would through participation be disqualified from deciding legal questions that might subsequently arise and that the legislative branch would be allowed to harass a President they wore in disagreement with. Legal considerations involved in building another brigs across the historical gap between our Constitution's separation of powers are also involved. It is: of course, imperative that all branches of Government cooperate m such times of contemplated crises as we are considering today. Creating a commission composed of the officials of the legislative branch as proposed could also lead to unfair accusations of partisanship.
4. The Supreme Court. Various proposals have placed the duty to make this determination upon the Supreme Court, emphasizing that here is an agency of our Nation that would least be apt to be
X194 •	P RKS PE NTIA ti INA 111111W
partisan. Apart from constitutional questions involveil in the Supreme Court's deciding such a political question, it is also certain
that disqualification of	members of our highest judicial tribunal would work a distinct disadvantage to our Nation if a subsequent judicial decision wore called for.
6. The Cabinet. The use of the Cabinet to make the decision on inability has ninny things to recommend it. These are: ( I) It involves the creation of no additional machinery (2) it offers a very simple mechanism; (8) it prevents a special inability commission from encountering embarrassing moments by creatinga crisis in the Nation by being called together unnecessarily and of constantly watching over the health of the Pivsidont ; (4) the Cabinet is in the best unformed position to give a prompt judgment; (6) our peo-
ple in effect vote to entrust a political party with executive power for years, and the Cabinet plan places responsibility upon this entrusted executive machinery and avoids any change or decisions on disability dictated by political bias; and (6) in keeping with our separation-of-powers doctrine, the Cabinet idea gives ninximum protection to the independent status of the executive branch.
The argument on the other side about the Garfield and Wilson Cabinets and their indecision is not entirely valid because the Cabinet then had neither statutory nor constitutional authority to take action. Any action by them would have been regarded as usurpation of power. In the Cases of the Garfield and Wilson Cabinets there was 'also no way in which those Cabinets believed they could have the Vice President. take over ns Acting President temporarily and then reinstate President, Garfield or President Wilson if their inability was later removed. The proposed statutory and constitutional amendments eliminate that possibility by providing for the office of Acting President. But, the most important consideration is that the Cabinet knows more about, our security picture than any other group of people and if the President is ill, they would not, risk the security of our Notion through his inability to act. In this shrinking and perilous world that reasoning appeals to me very much.
How should inability be determined 9 Historically, the real problem of Presidential inability has not stemmed from a question of determining the existence of any Presidential inability. This is the error of those people who focus on some sort of a commission Om with a staff of medical experts to make the determination. The inability usually has been clear and undisputed. Nevertheless, various proposals have suggested a requirement that a finding of disability he arrived at only after medical evidence has been presented and considered. But it is also true that any rational decision would have to be based on a certain amount of such evidence, so that it would manifestly appear unnecessary to require medical testimony and public hearings in a constitutional amendment. To require such a procedure might• well be burdensome and subject the existinF bead of our Nation to unfortunate publicity that can easily be avoided. Wo must do nothing that leads to diminution in the stature of the Presidency.
Then, too, in certain instances it might be impossible to provide for medical inspection and evidence as in circumstances when the President is captured by the enemy or is otherwise inaccessible. Requiring a hearing would tend to further prolong the early return of our Pram-
PlIESIDIZITIAL INABILITY	195
Mont, in the public confidence, lemon morale and provide unnecessary delay at a moment when the Nation would vitally need its leader. I say unnecessary delay since the President's own Cabinet aelectees would presumably act upon some form of competent information. They would obviously act only if the inabilit:i was clear.
Who should determine that the President's inability has tenni-ted1 Ono proposal would permit the President to resume his duties upon a simple declaration of his ability to do so. The chief objection
to such a procedure is that it might enable a man to resume the officeof President while still factually incapable.
It has been further suggested that in case of dispute the Congress could bo empowered to determine the termination of the President's inability in a hearing similar to impeachment proceedings but denominated by some other name. The constitutional objection that the legislative branch would ho determining Presidential succession would not apply since a mere resumption of duties would be the only issue before Congress.
CONCLUSION
I would summarize as follows:
First, a constitutional amendment is the only way to end the uncertainty resulting from the controversy over the constitutional power. of Congress to resolve the Presidential inability problem by statute.
Second, the initial determination of Presidential inability should remain in the executive branch.
Third, the President should have the power to return to his office on his own volition when his capacity is restored.
Fourth, the ultimate power of review in case of dispute over restoration of the President to his office should rest in the whole Congrem.
You have before you a problem which is not now but which is more pressing for solution today than at any other One because of the disasters that could befall our country and the free world from any lapse in the exercise of the office of President of the United States. Congress has a grave responsibility to perform hero. I have every confidence in your judgment and again congratulate you on the thorough manner in which you have gone about your consideration of the important issues which are before you.
I stress again that I have great admiration and respect for those entertaining views different from those that I have expressed here. I recognize that you have many different proposals before you which have merit. T have not in this statement attempted to cover all of the many ramifications of the many questions involved in this matter of Presidential inability, but only to discuss what appears to mo to be the controlling issues. The ultimate decisions which this subcommittee must make will be extremely difficult.
I conclude by assuring you of my lasting interest in this whole matter and of my willingness to be of assistance in any way I can either personally or by persuading other members of die American Bar Association to assist you in any way that you may desire.
Again I want to thank you for your invitation to appear here and for the courtesy with which you have heard me.
Senator ICEFAUYER. Well, Mr. Rhyne, we are certainly grateful to you for giving us a statement that is well considered, both from the legal viewpoint and from the viewpoint of practicality. And it is
196	PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY
quite obvious that you have given this problem much consideration, and I know that the Members of the Congress, this subcommittee, and the public generally will appreciate the importance of you and the American liar Association assisting in presenting this very important matter to the public in an intelligent way. We am grateful to you.
I
Now, may  ask you 2 or 8 questions?
In your statement you would recommend that the Cabinet---and I suppose you are referring to the heads of the administrative agencies, because they may be different.
Mr. RI M& Senator, I recognize the distinction there. And while I used the term "Cabinet" I believe in a constitutional sense that many of the constitutional experts use the term "heads of executive departments." And every place that I used "Cabinet" I intended it to be the heads of the executive departments.
Senator KRFAUVER. Wel ,1 we will use the Cabinet for convenience. You recommend that the Cabinet be the agency charged with termination of certain questions here having to do with inability and removal of inability, and you state strong reasons why this is true, which we all recognize—t4hat they are close to the President, and know the situation of the country.
But arguments aro made by some that. they do nut like the idea of nonelected people having the right to make such an important decision. Argument is made by some of our colleagues that they feel that some group of people who have been elected should have this responsibility.
Do you see anything inconsistent or wrong in giving this responsibility to people who have selected by the President, with the advice of the Senate?
Mr. RH;rzu Senator, I do not. I feel there is a matter of separation of powers which is involved here, and certainly this is an execu-tiVe matter. And if you are going to take it away from the executive and give it. to any.other groupt like the Congress, for example, on this initial determination of disability, whether true or not, you would inject charges of unfair partisan bias. And of course the Vice President, under the provisions that I have seen, would also participate with the Cabinet in making this decision. And the Vice President is an elected officer. I think the provision that. I like best provides with the consent of the Vice President the decision will be made by the Cabinet, And of course he is the man who is most vitally affected by this whole thing. So I think there is a safeguard insofar as elected officials are concerned.
Senator KFZAIIVER. Well, Mr. Rhyne, I want to say on my own that
I first approached the proposition,, lus proposition, with a feeling that there should be some participation in the decision by the leaders of Congree-s, along with the Cabinet. That is included in the resolution Thave filed. I have been impressed more and more by the arguments that• you and others have made that the Cabinet approach is a sound approach, and I think you have forcibly stated it here in your statement.
Now, the other question is, you set. forth on page 18 that in case of a dispute over the restoration of the President to his office, that the settlement of that dispute should rest in the whole Congress?
Mr. RIM S& Yes, I have, Senator, and my feeling about that is this. I first of ell start out with the conclusion that the President
PIIKIBIDMTIAI, INABILITY	• 197
himself should at any time on his own volition be able to reassume his office. And if there is a dispute, on his ability to do so at that time, it seems to me that we must have some mechanism, other than his own Cabinet nt that time, to decide that dispute, because the Cabinet mid the Vice President would have participated in the decision to, in effect, displace the President temporarily. Su it, was my feeling that since the Congress is the traditional body that, has passed upon such 111111ter8 ns impeachment, which is a matter, it seems to me, more related to the issue that would arise at that time, that there would be no infringement of the powers doctrine if the Congress as a whole would pass upon the issue of whether or not the President does have the capacity to reassume his office.
Senator KiwAuvEn. I think that is a logical conclusion.
Bid now one question remains which you do not deal with, and that is, during the pendency of the dispute, who shall exercise the power of the President. That is, assuming that the President has declared his inability, or assuming that the Cabinet has determined the inability, and the Vice President takes over, and then the President wishes to resume his office, feeling that his disability has terminated, but there is a dispute as to whether ho Is capable of doing so or not,--do you feel that the President should be restored to his duties and carry them out while the issue is being decided by the Congress?
Mr.	Well, I would feel something	this: That the Presi-
dent should give a proper notice of his desire to reassume.
Senator ICErmivr.s. You mean have some short waiting period?
Mr. Itimsx. Yes—of a certain number of days,. say 10 days—if the President would decide ho wanted to reassume hs office, and he was capable of doing it, and if he gave that nubile notice, and the Vice President and the Cabinet did not agree that he had he capacity to reassume, I would say that the Congress would have to act within the length of time, or if it did not, the President should be allowed to `resume his office.
The office of the President is, as I have said before, the greatest office in the whole world, and I don't think we ought to do anything that will diminish it. And I think that would be a protection against a long, drawn-out discussion or hearing in the Congress. I think the Congress could now, before any questions arise, draw up proper rules of procedure for passing upon the issue so that within a period of 10 days if there were any question it could pass on it, and would pass on it because of its overwhelming importance.
Now, I am quite certain, Senators that some mechanics could be worked out so as to prevent any questions arising with respect to passing on that issue by the Congress. I don't attempt to state any definite, concrete plan. But within that broad framework.
Senator KEPAUVER. But you would not write that into the constitutional amendment?
Mr. RHYNE. No. I would put in a constitutional amendment, Senator, the provision that upon giving notice, the President could, within a certain number of days, resume his office. I think it is extremely im-
portant that we protect	stature of the office of the President. And then I would provide that the Cabinet, if any question is raised with the Vice President and Cabinet, could call the Congress into session if it was not in session, and have the Congress pass on it.. If the
108	PRKAIDENTIAII. INAIMITY
Congress did not pass upon it within that length of time, the President
would absolutely have a right to his dice.
Senator KIWAvian, Senator Dickson,
Senator 1)1100EN. I have only one question.
Actually, if a dispute arisys, as	in your fourth conclusion,
that is a &pule within the executive branch itself. It can be between the President, of course, and the Vice President, and the members of the Cabinet.
Now, there would be only one way to resolve that dispute, as I seeit, it, ad that. is to lind some arbiter on the outside of the executive branch. And that. is the basis for bringing Congress into it, probably by moans of a concurrent resolution or something.
by
1trrYNli. Yes, that is right,
Senator Diatom. So actually, I quite agree. I don't. Relieve it does violence at all to the whole concept of the separation of powers, itemise, if within that branch, itself, you have a dispute, how shell it be rtvolvedI You would either have to go to some other instrinen-taility within the executive branch. lint if they pair up on one side or the other? you are not any better off than yon were before, and you have a continuing dispute. So you have got. to get an arbiter on the outside.
\fr. Rm.:qt.:. Yea, I certainly agree with you, Senator, and I think that Congress is the proper arbiter.
Senator DIHRSEN. I think that is all.
I want to say that. I think your capsule summation here under the four heads pretty well sets up the whole case, Mr. Rhyne.
Mr. RHYNE. thank you. Coining from a great constitutional lawyer like you Senator, I thank von very much.
Senator KRFAUVER. Any ot'hor questions, Senator Dirksen
Senator DiRKSEN. No, thankyou.
Senator KEFAUVER. Senator Wiley?
Senator Wit.E.y. Well, I shall, of course, take time to read this. I
am sorry I could not be here this morning, but there were just. too many requirements ors my time.
I got, from the interrogation of Senator Dirksen, that. you felt that. it was necessary for a constitutional amendment to provide that if the legislative branch wore going to have anything to do about it, it. had to be written into the Constitution.
Mr. RIITNIL Yes, Senator, I feel that is absolutely necessary because of the separation powers doctrine that is inherent in our Con-st itut ion.
Senator WILET. I think there is a general animist's on that con-elusion.
Now the whole question, then, goes to the matter of disability. We had the Attorney General up here, and ho gave a pretty good satement. I guess you agree with it. Ills conclusion was that in the first analysis, the matter of disability would devolve possibly for a determination upon the Vice President. Do you agree to that—as it stands now ?
Mr. RIIYNE. As it stands now, yes, sir.
Senator lirmr. That. is what I am talking about,
Mr. Rlivx,:. Although I admit there is some dispute about it, that would be my interpretation—that now the Vice President does because he is the one who--
199
Senator Wuxi.. Ire is the successor.
Mr. RIME, I le is the successor, and he would have that duty.
Senator WILEY. Now, the matter of disability itself creates u ground fora great deal of argument. A man might be physically disabled and not, mentally—you agree to that 1
Mr. Incest.,Oh, .es, certainly.
Senator Wirmv. Ile might be incapseitated so he could not even sign his name, and yet be fully muipped to make determinations or decisions.
Mr. Ittivxm. I ant	a medical doctor, hut would assume that that
Ritual ion could exist.
Senator W mix. Well: you are a doctor of laws, note medical doctor.
We had that instance in the ease of President Wilson, you remember. And there WIN consideralde dispute (here hack and forth between the Cabinet end others. Seine of them wanted to take over the show, and Wilson said "No."
Hut now there is only ode final question, and that is•the general overall advisability and need for placing at this time before the American people an nmendment !well 1114 you have outlined.
Now let's have your reaction to that.
Mr. Morse., Well, Senator, my feeling about it, is simply this. The Office of the President of the United States is the most important office in the whole world. Because of President Eisenhower's illnesses, this question has received attention, not only here in our country, but throughout the whole world. I have traveled some 00,000 miles in the last ()months, and I have traveled in Europe and South America. And they are just AR much concerned—and I am speaking of the leaders of the bar and some of the leaders of government that I have met--about this problem.
I feel there is a certain amount of uneasiness among our people about it, because they have the very justified impression that the 'existing situation rather clouds the whole problem. And I feel that the people are looking to the Congress to act on this.
Everyone feels now, because it, has been pointed up in the press and stressed repeatedly, that Moscow is only about 30 seconds from Washington, that there may come a time on a moment's notice when the Commander in Chief of our Army, the President, must be prepared to throw everything we have into some emergency. And no one wants to feel that there could be any possible lapse or gap in the Office of the President of the United States.
So on your question about need, I feel that there is a need for the Congress to provide an answer to this, and to provide it now.
Senator WILEv. Well, of course, we have had a good many instances in English history where kings have become incapacitated, and so forth, and it has been taken over by some successor when kings have been insane.
lint I agree fully that in this space age, where the world has been contracted by man s ingenuity, that we have got to have new instrumentalities.
What I was really getting at was whether or not this creates a situation for more chaos. For instance, you have got the Vice President in the first place. Then, as I understand it, there is some provision for Cabinet action; is that right 1
200	PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY
Mr. RHYNE. Yes; Cabinet action in conjunction with the Vice President.
Senator WILEY. And then, if that is not determinative, for congressional action?
Mr. RHYNE. Well, my suggestion, Senator, was that the Cabinet, with the consent of the Vice President, act in the initial determination of Presidential inability, and then if the President announces that he is ready to resume his office, and there is any question as to his capacity to do so, that that question be resolved by the Congress.
Senator YVILEY. Well we have had instances in history of people clutching for power. One might seek to maintain power and the other to take power. You have had kings dethroned, and you have had a Cromwell, and others that have marched in. And the human equation is always a thing that has got to be considered. And as I heard the Attorney General the other day, I was just thinking out loud—and I am just thinking out loud now—whether we were creating a mechanism that, is more difficult to handle than the present Constitution as it is. That is really the basic question.
It seems to me that here you have, according to the public papers. an understanding between flee President and the Vice President, mid what the exact terms are we don't knows but apparently there is complete agreement in case of any incapacity. If he should become so incapacitated, that ho himself felt that fie could not handle the job, and so stated in writing, do you agree that under the constitutional provisions at, presbnt that the Vice President would have the authority to take over?
Mr. RHYNE. Oh, yes; I think that the Vice President could. But I don't believe, Senator, that the announcement of the President—I think it was a very laudable and praiseworthy announcement, and he is to be commended for it,---intended to suggest that as a permanent solution to this very difficultproblem. And I feel that an answer must be given, and that the real answer is for a constitutional amend. inent containing the provisions that I have outlined to be enacted.
Senator WILEY. Well, you know that more cooks spoil the pie is an old saying. You have got the Constitution outlining the situation as it is. I am not suggesting anything in my opinion. I am just thinking out loud in terms of complicating the constitutional machinery. And I am thinking in terms also of—you talked about the atomic age, when it is probably some 16 minutes away from Moscow we are, and probably less. How in the devil would you ever get a Congress together if you got into a war? You know you couldn't do that. We have got to get adequate machinery—if we are awake now, we have got to get adequate machinery to make it so that, we could have probably the Congress in session without assembling in Washington, or even assembling in one place. All that has got to be thought out, And if you are going to make this condition of action, of a congressional action, the question in my mind is whether you have got the remedy.
Mr. RHYNE. Well, Senator, I am not suggesting on the initial determination that Congress have anything to do with it. I am sug-gvsting that the Cabinet with the consent of the Vice President do it. And that can be done in a few minutes.
PR ESIIYMTIAL INABILITY	201
With respect to the President reassuming, I am suggesting that if the President notifies in writing the Vice President and I assume the Speaker of the House that he is ready to resurns his office, that he do so in 10 days, or whatever days would seem to be reasonable, And if, in the meantime, there is any question about his ability to do so, that the Congress pass on it. And if the Congress cannot meet to pass on it, that the President resume his office in that 10 days. He gets his office back in 10 days absolutely, unless the Congress meets in the meantime and passes upon the issue or thereafter passes upon the issue. So there would be no gap.
Senator Wrixv. Well, then, according to your syggestiont the con• gressional action would only take place after the Vice President has taken over and there is a question then of whether the President has regained his health.
Mr. RIIYNE. That is right. And I would hope that no such dispute Would ever arise. I mean it is an "if" question= Senator, and I would think it is almost inconceivable that any President whd didn't have his full capacities would ever raise such an issue, or that any Vice
President would ever try to maintain his power if	President was
capable.
Senator WILEY. Oh, I couldn't agree with that statement. The human mind is an unpredictable contraption and history demonstrates that men have gotten notions about their own superiority, and their ego has unbalanced them. And that is why I.am thinking in terms of the machinery.
Senator ICEPAIIVER. Are there any other questions of Mr. Rhyne? Mr. Smithey, you have some?
Mr. SMITHEY. Yes; I would like to ask a few questions, if you don't mind, sir.
Mr. Rhyne, I noticed that, in your suggestions of a moment ago, you said that the President ought to be permitted to resume his office upon his own initiative.
Mr. IlYNE. Well, I said after a certain period of notice.
Mr. Ssirrirsv. All right. After a certain period of time. That if there was a disputer the Cabinet or the heads of the executive departments could then,_ with the Vice President, disagree and send the issue to the Congress by that action, is that correct?
Mr. RHYNE. Yes.
Mr. SMITHEY. I presume that you would want to have some mechanism to insure that the decision would be by the Cabinet then in office, the members of the Cabinet then in office t
Mr. Rirrifs. Yes.
MicSii1171EY. Y014 would want to preserve the persons then acting? Mr. RHYNE. Yes
'I think so.
Mr. Sairrutv. Now, in addition to that consideration, would you limit the membership in that deciding body to the persons who have actually been nominated and confirmed for that. office, rather than the act ink heads of the departments?
Mr. RHYNE. Well, I would think that I would limit it to those who have been nominated and confirmed by the Senate, because I think that is iiiiportant.
Mr. Sairrszy. All right. Now, with respect to the' statutory approach, I don't recall that you covered this in your statement.
202	PRE:QM:NT:AL WAIIILITY
If the statutory approach is used, do you feel that there is authority in the Constitution for the President to recover his powers nod duties once he has been replaced by the Vice President?
Mr, Mime. Well, that is one of the great uncertainties, certainly based on the experience with the Oarlield-und Wilson incidents. And
I would say that because of those uncertainties there may not. be-and that is the reason why I think the constitutional amendment. should be used to eliminate all doubt. It is a close question. I think there are probably views both ways. But the only way to relieve the uncertainty is through the constitutional amendment rule.
Mr. Surnisy. Now, you made allusion, in your statement, to the feet that it has been suggested to the subcommittee that in the case of a dispute as to the President's ability to resume his.powers and duties, that resort be had to some proceedings similar to impeachment.
•	I take it from'your failure in your conclusiona to endorse that `Speeifie suggastion, that von would suggest something else besides impeachment proceedingst
Air. RHYNE. Oh, yes. I think, as I thought I intended to say, that. it. should be a proce(Inre that. Congress couldset up under this constitutional amendment that would allow it to pass on this very simple issue. And so it would not be necessary to go through the machinery of impeachment.
Mr. Sammy. As an aid iii understanding your suggestion in that regard, would you require, in the event the imue was to be determined by the Congress; that a vote adverse to the President's recovery of ltis powers and duties require two-thirds of the Members of the Con-gress—more than a simple majority, in other words?
Mr.RITYNN. Yes; I think so.
Mr. Sit [THEY. Now, if
Mr. RHYN1S. That would remove all possible polities' bins charges.
Mr. SMITHEY. Now, suppose for the moment that a President sought to return to his office at a time when ho had not recovered, and the Congress made that determination. Would you thereafter allow him to go through the same proceedings again ?
Mr. RIIYNE. I haven't considered that problem, Mr. Smithey, but. I would not, foreclose him, I don't think. The Office of the President, as I say, is such a great Office, that. I think there ought to be some limitation on it—he should not. be allowed to force the Congress to go through this repeatedly. But after one adverse vote, it might. be the issue is so close as to his inability that at some later time there would be no question as to his capacity.
Mr. SMITHEY. Mr. Chairman, I have no further questions.
•	Senator ICEFAINER. Mr. Rhyne,I was interested in your additional statement, commending the President and the Vice President on discussing this matter and reaching some understanding. And then your further statement that you were sure that at the proper time and place that. A full revelation of any understanding would be made. Mr. RHYNE. Well, I have no basis on which to base that except this, Senator—that it seems to me that. in connection with the President's various illnesses, they have made the most complete and full diselosure in all history of all facts, and so I would assume they would' follow that basic principle.
PlIESIDEN1 IAL INABILITY	203
Senator Ks'.Auvr.e. Well, you think It is a matter of public importance that any arrangement or agreement should in due course be made public?
Mr. RHYNE. I feel so, Senator, because RS I say, this office is so all-important, and everyone is interested in it, and everyone has so much at stake in the Office of the Presidency, that I would sincerely feel that at the proper time and place, the understending should be fully revealed.
Senator Kr:Fauvrui. Well, I agree with you. And as a Senator and chairman of this subcommittee, I want to make four points In connection with this matter which is being discussed at the present time:
First, I and glad that the President and the Vice President have considered the matter together. And I have 110 desire to know of their personal discussions of it. I think that is a matter that they have a right to keep in confidence.
lint, second, as to any arrangement or agreement that may Have resulted from that personal discussion, 1 can see no reason in the world why the Congress and the people of the United States should not be toil what it is. After all, it is our life as a country, and perhaps our lives as individuals which would be involved should there be another sudden attack on the President's health at a critical time in our existence.
Third, that no stopgap errnrigement, however meritorious the motive might. be in making it, should be allowed to deter the Congress in trying to deal with the fundamental problem which this situation creates. Furthermore, we are legislating here for all time to come, and not just for this particular situation now presented.
Fourth, it seems to me that the fact that the President and the Vice President, feel that this matter is so important, as to make an agreement shows the added urgency of and necessity of Congress itself submitting a resolution to the people for an amendment, so that there can be no question as to the legality of any actions that may be taken.
Do you agree generally with that?
Mr. RIIYNE. I certainly do, Senator. I think that is a very good statement.
Senator ICEPAUVER. At, this point, we will have some communications that we want toplace in the record.
A statement, from Arthur E. Sutherland, professor of law at. Harvard Universi+y, in response to a letter of ours. He attached an article that he has written, which wilt also be made a part of the record.
(The material referred to is as follows:)
LAW SCHOOL Or HARVARD UntstasIrr. Cambridge, Mass., January 24,1958.
Senator Nana }CREAMER,
Chairman, Standing Subcommittee on Constitutional Amendments, Committee on the Judiciary,
United States Senate, Washington, D. O.
DEAR SENATOR KErAtriER: Thank you very much for your courteous letter of January 10 to which I have been giving a good deal of thought. Last month I wrote a little article for the New York Herald Tribune which set forth my Ideas about Presidential Inability. I was interested In your Senate Joint Hesllutioa 133, for a constitutional amendment, introduced January 0, MS, which indicates that your views are very much like mine. I enclose a copy of the Tribune article. I suppose one of the most controversial aspects of these proposals and similar ones is participation by the Supreme Court, or by the Chief Justice. Today's New
204	PIIYATDINTIAL INADIt4TY
York Timis Indicates that rho Justices are opposed to any participation, and this attitude is in word with the traditional and proper aloofness of the Court from everything suggestive of polities. On the other hand, the greet grerity of the decision to be made concerning Preeldentiel inability, and the necessity that the
American people be assured that the derision is inado	solely upon the
evident., tends to unseat a judicial element in the Commission which passes on diashility, With full reelisation of the advantages anti disnilvanlages Involved, I am inclined to feel that the chyle° of the Chief Justice its the presiding °Meer
co
Mould be advantageous to the untry. Hut I nun boycotted by the reported
contrary view of those directly concerned,
With my best wishes, I am
Sincerely yours,
Manua E, Horn itu,AND.
l Front OR Niw York Herald Tribune, December 11, 108T)
A Norse Josner's PROPOSAL os PRksiossirtAL DirlAttirtry
(Hy Arthur E. Sutherland)
Mr. Sutherland, a former secretary to Subtle. Holmes and proton-ear of law at Ilervand since 1050, is ono of the Nation's outstanding authorities on constitutioual law. In this article especially written for the Herald Tribune ho discusses the question of Presidentinl
President Eisenhower, according to press reports, Is renewing his insistence that the Congress take some action to clarify the ancient problem of Prod-dentist disability. This Is more a problem of procedure than of substance.
"In Case of the Removal of the President from Office, or of his Death, Item-Welton, or Inability to discharge the Powers and Duties of the said Office, the Same shall devolve on the Vise President, and the Congress may by Law provide for the Case of Removal, Death, Itesignntion or inability, both of the President and Vice President, declaring what Officer Shall then act as President, and such Officer shall act actontingly, until the Disability is removed, or a President shall be elected." (Constitution, alt. H, see. 1, clause 0.)
Anyone who has worked at drafting laws soon senses the difficulty of the task it is not surprising that the rent men who drafted the Constitution should have lett 1 or 2 ambiguities. Under this clause It has been suggested that, If the Vice President takes over even for a single day, he becomes President for the remainder of the term. Such a result scarcely seems sensible, however, and probably most Americans would say that the President whom they have elected should be relieved of duty only during his inability to discharge the functions of his office.
Since Int, however, there has been a persistent question as to how dig-ability will be determined. On August 27, 1787, when the disability clause was before the Constitutional Convention, John Dickinson of Delaware remarked that it was too vague. "What is the extent of the term 'disability' and who is to be the judge of ItT" ho asked. Dickinson's question has never been answered; it caused particular concern during the months that preceded President Garfield's death, and during President Wilson's long illness.
President Garfield was shot by an assassin on July 2, 1881; until his death on the following September 19 he performed only ono official act—he signed a paper having to do with extradition. The Presidential duties of that simpler time were much less exacting than they have since become, and the United States was worried but not gravely prejudiced by the state of the President. A much more serious situation arose when Woodrow Wilson suffered a paralytic stroke on September 26, 1019. He was Incapacitated at the White House for at least 6 weeks, and attended no Cabinet meeting until April 18, 1920. Secretary of State Lansing called a number of Cabinet meetings during the autumn and winter, and the President's resentment at Lansing's initiative is thought to have brought about Mr. Lansing's resignation in February 1920.
Not one of President Eisenhower's illnesses has presented such a serious altos-Rom Nevertheless. as both the President and prominent Members of the Congress have recognized, the time has come to provide some procedure to determine when
President Is so disabled that the duties of his of	devolve upon the Vice President. The importance of establishing some such procedure and the variety of solu-
tions possible, appeared In the hearings held in April 1956 before the House Judiciary Committee's Special Subcommittee To Study Presidential Disability.
PlIFISIDENTIAL, INATIILITY	205
'rho point was there made tint while, fortunately, in the Ions history of the Pres!. deney there has been no Instance of a mentally III Chief /executive, this Is a pouf. billty, and such a alluntion would present serious embarrassments to the whole Milton. One can easily Imagine sOnto future President, thus afflicted, still corl• dent of his own continuing judgment and bitterly resentful of any suggestion thst his intellectual powers lutil foiled. An In President Wilson's Illness, some of his n Niacin les In the ndministrat ion, out of loyalty to the President and a belief In his continued abilities, might continua to uphold his competence, while others equally conscientious might feel that the situation called for the Vice President to lake over, There Is 110 existing machinery to resolve such an impasse. The limo to provide it is now, when the problem has not yet arisen. If need ever arises, there will be no limo to provide for It, and no reasonable means.
At the outset a question arises as to whether a constitutional amendment Is neeetouiry, or whether an net of Congress will do, lir/o we are embarrassed by what seems nn oversight of the constitutional draftsmen, and in the absence of a elenr constitutional directive, constitutional amendment seems the desirable course. 1.neking such a mandate, the Congress seems no more nuthorixed to unseat Cho President, whether for temporary or permanent disithillty, than the President la authorised to unseat a Senator or a Congressman, The Constitn• lion provides only one procedure for removing a President from offico—Himpeach• ment for and conviction of, treason, bribery, or other high crimes and solids. manors" (art. If, see. 4). The careful constitntional prescription for this procedure, with Its connotations of eriminnlIty, makes more conspicuous the ab• sense of any similar provision for disabling Illness. A constitutional amendment accordingly seems required.
Several types have been suggested, The simplest amendment would authorize the Congress to legislate for the ease of Presidentinl inability to perform his duties. But during a period of bitterness between Congress and President, as occurred during the Johnson admInistrollon, control of the Presidency by legislation might be unfortunnte. Whatever the procedure is, it belongs In the Constitution itself.
Not only does the country need the most accurate possible judgment as to the President's condition, but that determination should be made in a way which will gain a maximum of public confidence and acceptance. To this end represents. lives of all three branches of the Government should participate In the de-
If the question Is illness (rather than some such question as capture by an enemy force), the best possible medical opinion should of course be sought by the body deciding on inability. The Cabinet ban been suggested to decide; but its proper loyalty to a chief in his day of misfortune might defer decision too long. Congress bar the advantage of representing the national electorate, but the case of President Johnson suggests that Congress had best not bear the sole responsibility. The Supreme Court of the United States is detached from politics and widely respected, but It should not be charged alone With displacement of the Chief Executive. A better Disability Commission would represent all three branches. It could consist of the Seer& taries of State, Treasury, Defense, and the Attorney Oenersi; the majority leaders of the two major parties In the Senate and Itouse; and, as presiding officer, the Chief Justice, with power to cast a deciding vote In the case of a tie. The Disability Commission should assemble to determine disability on the call of any two members. The disabled President, or any two members, should be similarly empowered to call the Commission together to determine Presidential recovery.
Such a commission would have. the great advantage of sparing the Vice President the burden of announcing his own succession. And If it seems that four Cabinet officers might delay a finding of inability, one good answer is that the elected President should not be unadvisedly or lightly displaced.
Senator REFAUVER. A communication from Prof. Joseph F, 1Cellen-bach, professor of political science at the University of Michigan, to be made a part of the record.
22324-58--14
206	PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY
(The material referred to is as follows:)
UNIVERsITY
DEPARTMENT OF POLITICAL SCIENCE,
Arm Arbor, January 20, 1958.
lion. ESTES KEFAUVER,
Senate Office Building,
Washington, D. 0.
DEAR SENATOR KiKrAuvra: In reply to your letter of January 10, I am enclosing herewith a statement of my views on the subject of Presidential inability, with particular reference to proposed bills and joint resolutions pending before the standing Subcommittee on Constitutional Amendments of the Committee on the Judiciary.
I have previously had the opportunity to express my views on this matter before the Special Committee To Study Presidential Inability of the House Committee on the Judiciary in the 84th Congress. You may flud them in the House Committee Print on Presidential Inability, 84th Congress, 2d session, and in the hearings before the special committee for April 11 and 12, 1050, of that session. I have continued to give thought to the subject and to follow develop. meats in connection with it. In general, my views on how the problem should be met have not changed fundamentally, although I recognize the merit of other proposals at variance with the approach I outlined at that time. I think that the Congress should submit a constitutional atnendment on the subject clarifying the question of the status of the succeeding officer in different types of situations where there is a devolution of Presidential powers and duties on a succeeding officer. The nnieudment should also establish beyond any doubt the authority of Congress to provide, by legislative net, a procedure to be utilized in determining when a situation has arisen calling into play the disability provision. I believe that the Congress, under the terms of article II, section 1, paragraph 0, and the necessary-and-proper clause of article I, section 8, of the Constitution, now has the authority to provide such a procedure and that it should take steps immediately to do so. I think that it it did so, the procedure outlined would be respected and utilized if a situation to which it applies should arise.
However, I recognize that there are some grounds for questioning whether Congress, at present, has the power to circumscribe by statute the freedom of judgment and action of the l'resident and Vice President in a case of alleged Presidenttal disability, especially in a situation where the President is unwilling or unable to acquiesce in a finding and declaration of his own disability. A finding that the President is unable to exercise the powers and discharge the duties of his office under these circumstances would have the effect of temporarily suspending him from office without his express consent. This is a most serious step and could conceivably result in grave political controversy. Furthermore, the usage to the effect that a Vice President who has succeeded to the Presidency "becomes" the President, rather than the "Acting President," has given rise to the belief, entirely erroneous in my opinion, that any succession to the powers and duties of the Presidency by the Vice President forecloses resumption of them by the displaced President. This view of the matter has been a stumbling block for efforts by Congress in the past to implement the disability clause by legislation, and has deterred Presidents and Vice Presidents from acting under this provision on their own initiative. To resolve any doubt regarding the possibility of a temporary devolution of Presidential powers and duties on a succeeding officer, I think a constitutional amendment approach to the matter should also be employed.
I have appended to my statement the substantive language of a proposed draft of a constitutional amendment which would clarity these points. Also appended is a proposed draft of a statute to implement the Presidential disability provision. You will note that the proposed amendment is similar to Senate Joint Resolution 133 in that it would leave to Congress the responsibility of prescribing by statute the details of the procedure to be used for determining a Presidential inability which the President himself does not recognize and declare.
I recognize the advantage in employing the "one-shot" approach by including in the language of a constitutional amendment an outline of the procedure to be followed in determining a Presidential inability. However, a great amount of detail must be included to deal with all possible contingencies and questions, and supplementary leAslation would probably be necessary in any event. In my opinion it would be undesirable to place such matters of detail in the Constitution.
PRFAIIIMTIAL INABILITY	207
I believe that the Congress can be properly trusted to devise an acceptable statute on the subject. It It be argued that the power might be abused for partisan reason% the same can be said of almost any other power Congress now has relutive to the organization and functioning of the other two branches of the National Government. Enactment forthwith of an Implementing statute would allay fears that a Congress hostile to the ),ectitive would seize the opportunity to enact a statute un the subject converting the disability clause into an Instrument for effecting removal 11 a President from office on a trumped-up charge of "disability," ratified by officers of cougress' own choosing. The welter of views and opinions on this subject which the current situation has called forth, I
realize, has complicated lbi	k of the Congress In choosing a proper course of
action. I think it highly Importsat that In considering the problem the Congress keep In mind that no system it can devise will be absolutely foolproof. airtight, and incapable of abuse to the binds of partisan minded, unpatriotic, and self-seeking human beings. There has to be an assumption that a procedure prescribed for dealing with a Presidential Inability crisis will he used to achieve the proper ends for which it was devised—the tilling of an Intolerable vacuum in the Presidential office. The force of public opinion and the good judgment and sense of public duty of the officers Involved can and must he relief on In the end to insure the realization of this objective through appropriate machinery provided by law.
Thank you for the opportunity to express by views on this matter.
Very sincerely yours,
JOSEPH K KALLENRACIL
PROPOSED CONSTITUTIONAL. AMENDMENT ON PRESIDENTIAL. SUCCESSION AND
DISABILITY
ARTICLE —
SEC. 1. If the President dies, resigns, or Is removed from office, the Vice President shall become President for the remainder of the term to which the President was elected.
14w. 2. If the President becomes unable for any reason to discharge the powers and duties of his office, they shall devolve upon the Vice President, who shall then act ns President nut!l the disability of the President be removed, or the term of office of the President shall expire. Congress shall by law establish the procedure by which the inability of the President to discharge the powers and duties of his office shall be determined, and provide for the ease of the removal, death, resignation, or inability both of the President and Vice President, declaring what officer shall then act as President; and such officer shall act accordingly, until the disability be removed, or a President shall be elected.
Soo. 3. Article II, section 1, paragraph 6, Is hereby repealed.
PROPOSED STATUTE IMPLEMENTING THE PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY CLAUSE
Be ft enacted by the Senate and House of Representatfres of the United States In Congress assembled, That (a) the analysis of chapter 1 of title 3 of the United States, Code (entitled "The President") is amended by inserting at the end thereof the following new Item :
"SEC. 21. Ascertainment of the inability of the President to discharge his tinges."
(h) Such chapter is amended by inserting at the end thereof the following new section:
"SEC, 21. Ascertainment of the Inability of the President to discharge his duties:
"(a) In case the President is temporarily unable to discharge the powers and ditties of the office of President, he shall so notify in writing the Vice President, the Speaker of the Muse of Representatives, and the President pro tempore of the Senate. Upon trensmission of such communication the powers and, duties of the office of President shall devolve upon the Vice President, who shall discharge them until the President notifies in writing the Vice President, the Speaker of the House of Representatives, and the President pro tempore of the Senate that he is able to reassume the powers and duties of his office, or until a new President is inaugurated, whichever occurs sooner.
208	PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY
"(b) if at the time a President shall declare his inability to discharge the powers and duties of his office there is no Vice President, or the Vice President shall declare his own inability to discharge the powers and duties of the Presidency, such powers and duties shall devolve, for the duration of the President's inability or until the end of the then current Presidential term as provided in subsection (a), upon the officer next In line of succession, as determined pursuant to section 10 of this chapter.
"(e) In case of the inability of the Vice President, while acting as President by reason of the inability of the President, to discharge the powers and duties of that office, such powers and duties shall devolve in like manner upon the officer next in line of succession, as determined pursuant to section 10 of this chapter: Provided, however. That the President, or the Vice President, as the case may be, may give notice In writing of his ability to reassume the powers and duties of the office of President, and so reassume them, n8 provided in subsection (a).
"(d) There is hereby created a Committee on Presidential Inability to consist of the officers named in the line of the Presidential succession by section 19 of this chapter, the lender in the Senate of the political party having the greatest number of Members of the Senate, the lender in the Senate of the political party having the second greatest number of Members of the Senate, the leader in the House of Representatives of the political party having the greatest number of Members of the House of Representatives, and the leader In the House of Representatives of the political party having the second greatest number of Members of the House of Representatives. If the Vice President has reasonable cause to believe that the President is unable to discharge the powers and duties of h-a office and the President has not acted under the procedure provided in subsection (a) to cause the powers nud duties of the Presidency to devolve upon the Vice President, he may request the Committee on Presidential Inability to render a judgment on the question of the ability of the President to discharge the powers and duties of his office. If a two-thirds majority of the members of the committee find that the President la unable to discharge the powers and duties of his oftlee, it shall so notify the Vice President and he shall forthwith act as President until such tlute as the President shall notify in writing the Vice President, the Speaker of the House of Representatives, and the President pro tempore of the Senate that his disability has ceased, or until the end of the Presidential term, whichever occurs sooner.
"(e) The Congress may, by concurrent resolution approved by a majority of the Members of each House, declare that it has reasonable cause to believe that the President, or the officer acting as President, is unable to discharge the powers and duties of the office. Upon the passage of such a concurrent resolution the Committee on Presidential Inability shall render a judgment on the question of the inability of the President, or the officer acting as President, to discharge the powers and duties of his office, as provided in subsection (d).
"For the purpose of considering such a resolution the President pro tempore of the Senate may convene the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives may convene the House of Representatives.
"(f) If at any time there is no Vice President, the officer next in the line of Presidential succession, as determined pursuant to section 19 of this chapter, is hereby authorized to proceed and act in the same manner as the Vice President, as provided in subsection (d). In such case, however, the officer next in the line of Presidential succession shall not serve as a member of the Committee on Presidential Inability.
"(g) Any officer who shall, as provided in this section, assume the powers and duties of the office of President shall be entitled to receive compensation equivalent to that of the President for the duration of the period during which he shall discharge the powers and duties of the office of President. During the period he may act ail President, such officer shall retain the title to the office by reason of which the duty of acting as President shape have devolved upon him; but he shall not exercise the powers and discharge the duties thereof. Any provisions of section 19 of this chapter inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed."
PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY	209
MEMORANDUM ON PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY
(By Joseph E. Kaltenbach)
Any plan for implementing the constitutional provision concerning Presidential inability must provide answers to the questions and problems which follow:
I. How shall (nobility be defined?
I believe that it is unnecessary and unwise to attempt to define by statute the term "Inability" as used in article II, section 1, paragraph 0 of the Constitution. Tim framers in adopting this term undoubtedly had in mind any contingency or condition that might render a President unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office as the public interest and necessities may require. It should not be restricted to physical inability as proposed in S. 238. The Presidency Is an office that makes extraordinarily heavy demands upon the physical, mental, and spiritual capacities of the occupant. For this reason, inability should be determined in this connection by a much more rigorous test than that applied In determining mental competence or capacity of an individual to act in a personally responsible manner.
2. By whom shall the inability of the President be determined!'
A statute on the subject of Presidential inability should drat of all make clear the right of the President himself to declare his own temporary inability, If he regards his disability as a transient thing, as he might well do in the case of a temporarily incapacitating Illness, for example, he should have the option of divesting himself of the powers and duties of his office, without on the one hand surrendering the office irrevocably by resigning or on the other hand pursuing a course of inaction and drift.
In the event there is reason to believe the Inability clause should be mad, operative, and the President falls or Is obviously unable to act to give effect to it, the statute should provide an agency for rendering an authoritative judgment on the matter, after due deliberation. My suggestion is that this body be made up of the heads of major executive departments and congressional leaders. The judgment to be rendered is one involving the evaluation of the public need and necessity for a continuing responsible discharge of the powers and duties of the office of Chief Executive in the light of conditions which seriously impair or totally prevent .the incumbent President from making a judgment himself on the matter. Whether such a situation exists is a political decision of great delicacy and importance. It requireS the evaluation Of many political facts bearing on the question. For this reason I question the advisability of making it a matter for the courts to decide. To refer the matter to the Supreme Court for resolution, at proposed in Senate Joint Resolution 100, would have the advantage of placing the prestige of that body behind the decision, of course, and that would contribute greatly to popular acceptance of the judgment reached. However, I question the advisability of vesting this responsibility in the Supreme Court. The decision to be rendered is not one based simply on application of legal principles but on a weighing of various facts having political implications and oiertones lying beyond the realm of legal logic and medical science.
I believe the officers placed in the line of the Presidential succession have a special interest in and competence to make this decision. I favor the idea of associating with them In this also the majority and minority leaders of the two Houses of Congress, as proposed in Senate Joint Resolution 134. This would insure a wider representation of congressional views, including spokesmen for both major political parties. At the same time the composition of the body would insure that a majority of them are executive officials representative of the administration and presumably loyal to the President's interests. No recommendation could be made for a temporary devolution of Presidential powers and duties except with the concurrence of some of the members, at least, of the President's Cabinet. I think this is a proper and workable arrangement, tending to insure that no decition authorizing devolution of Presidential powers and duties will be made unless there Is a strong and publicly defensible case for it.
3. Who shay initiate eonaideration of the question of •Pretidentiel Ina
As I have indicated in the discussion of point (2) above, I believe the int-tiative in bringing about a devolution of Presidential powers and duties could and should, normalljt, be left to the President, acting solely on his own judgment. The initiation of an inquiry into his ability to act when he falls to do so, or is
210	PRISIBENTIAL INABILITY
obviously unable to do so, should be left in the first instance to the officer next in line of succession, normally the Vice President. He has a constitutional obligation and duty to discharge the powers and duties of the President in case of the latter's inability. Hence be should be expected to raise the question of the existence of conditions calling this aspect of the succession rules Into play. Political considerations and loyalty to the President, however, may inhibit him from taking the Initiative in presenting the question to the body empowered to ren er an official judgment. For that reason, I think the statute on the subject should also clearly recognize the authority of the Congress to initiate a consideration of the question. I believe these two alternative modes of presenting the issue of a President's inability to the body empowered to make a judgment would suffice.
4. What should be the status of the officer acting as President during a period of Presidential inability?
My belief Is that the statute should clearly state that the position of the succeeding officer is that of Acting President. He should be regarded as an officer to whose office there have been temporarily annexed the powers and duties of the Presidency. Ile should retain the office by virtue of which be succeeds to the responsibility of exercising the powers and performing the duties of the Presidency; but he should be freed from the necessity of discharging the powers and duties of his own office. Otherwise, in the case of the first three officers In the line of succession, the Vice President, the Speaker of the House. and the President pro tempore of the Senate, there would be an illogical and conceivably unconstitutional joining of legislative and executive responsibilities in the hands of one person.
The temporarily displaced President should be regarded as retaining title to the office of President, but without the responsibilities of acting as such. The devolution of his powers and duties under these circumstances must be considered complete, embracing the totality of Presidential powers and responsibilities. Unless the President retains title to the office itself, however, there would be no basis for any action restoring to him the authority to exercise the powers and duties of his office. The conception that there can be no separation of the powers and duties of the office of President from the office itself has, up to ,the present, stood In the way of making the disability provision of the Constitution' effective. It has been given support by the usage of treating a Vice President who succeeds to the powers and duties of the Presidency in case of the death of the incumbent as having become President. Unless this conception that the succeeding officer becomes President is clearly disavowed in legislation designed to implement the disability clause there is no point in trying to establish a procedure for dealing with the disability problem as such. Otherwise the procedure established becomes simply a special procedure for removing a President on the ground of inability. There would be no point in providing a procedure for reinstating the displaced President in an office he has ceased to hold.
5. Who shall determine the question of whether a President's inability his been terminated?
In my opinion there is only one authority who can be expected to determine this question, viz, the President himself. Regardless of whether he himself voluntarily declared his own disability, or acquiesced by his silence and inaction in a devolution of the powers and duties of his office brought about through the special procedures for determining his inability, he must be recognised as having the right to exercise the powers and duties of his office if he asserts that right, so long as he retains title to it. Ills power to do so should not be made subject to the approval of any body created to give sanction and political support for the temporary assumption of the President's functions by a succeeding officer. It there has been a devolution of Presidential powers and duties by default, so to speak, accompanied by a finding to that effect by a responsible special organ of the Government representing both political branches of tht.. Government, it may be assumed that the President, before attempting to reassume the powers and duties of his office, will be able to demonstrate beyond all doubt that the reasons which led to the judgment that he was incapacitated no longer are valid. He should not be regarded as having been tentatively ousted from office.
If the President's judgment on the point of the restoration of his ability to discharge the powers and duties of his office is not to be trusted, then the whole
PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY	211
problem takes on a different form. It becomes one of devising a system for suspending the President from office without his consent on the alleged ground of inability. If that is what is to be provided for rather than a plan for facilitating the operation of the disability provision of the Constitution, obviously there Is a great deal more being attempted through the plans proposed than I bad assumed. I should think, at any rate, that if provision Is to be made whereby a temporarily disabled President would be required to secure the approval of some special body or court before he could reassume the powers and duties of his office, the matter would have to be dealt with by a constitutionsi. amendment. The statute I have suggested for dealing with the question of disability Is based on the assumption that the President is still President, even when there has been a temporary devolution of his powers and duties upon a successor. That being so, I doubt that the Congress can limit, by statute, his discretion in determining his fitness to reassume the powers and functions of his office.
Senator KErAuvEa. A thoughtful letter from David Fel!man, professor of political science at the University of Wisconsin, to which Ile attaches a more detailed statement to be made a part of the record.
(The material referred to is as follows:)
Tus UNIVERSITY or IVISCONBIN,
DEPARTMENT OF POLITICAL SCIENCE,
Madison, Wis., January 15, 1958. Senator Es'res KEFAUVER,
Chairman, Subcommittee on Constitutional Amendments,
Senate Office Building, Washington, D. C.
DEAR SENATOR KEFAUVER: I am writing to you in response to your letter of January 10, which Is concerned with the question of presidential inability.
I made a fairly detailed statement of my views on this subject to the Committee on the Judiciary of the House of Representatives, on December 12, 1955, in response to a request from Congressman Celler. I atn enclosing a copy of my statement, which will be found in the House committee print, 84th Congress, 2d session, presidential inability, dated January 31, 1950, at pages 21 to 26. This statement still represents my views on this subject.
In the light of the several proposed bills or reselutions now pending before your subcommittee, I should like to make a few additional observations.
I do not believe that a constitutional amendment Is really necessary In order to authorize Congress to pass legislation on this subject. I think that normal canons of constitutional construction would amply support extensive legislation to Implement what the Constitution now says on the subject.
Nevertheless, I see no great harm in adding an amendment, if it will remove serious doubts as to the power of Congress to act In the premises. If an amendment is added, however, it is perfectly clear to me that your 8. J. Res. 133 is infinitely superior to S. J. 100 or S. J. 134, merely as a matter of form. The Constitution is simply no place for the sort of detailed legislation proposed in these latter resolutions. It is not wise, in my opinion, to load the Constitution down with procedural and substantive details as to which the Congress and the country may some time want to change their minds. It is wholly sufficient, and much wiser, I believe, merely to authorize Congress to pass appropriate legislation, spelling out clearly the area which the legislation is designed to cover. In this light I think S. J. Res. 133 is altogether adequate, just as it is.
As my enclosed statement indicates, I take the position that the determination of the fact of Presidential Inability should be vested in the hands of a specially constituted body. I arrived at this conclusion by a process of elimination. In my opinion, and with all due respect, Congress is not the appropriate body to make this decision, first, because such a numerous assemblage of men and women is unfitted to decide a question involving the ability of a single person to hold the office of President, on the basis of evidence, and secondly, because there are
long periods of time during which Congress is not even in session. I would rule out the Cabinet altogether, since the members of the Cabinet serve entirely at the pleasure of the President, have no wills of their own independently of his, and have a vested interest in the President's banging on to his office under any circumstances. I would also eliminate the Vice President entirely from the process of making a finding of Presidential inability for the rather simple reason that he would be sitting in judgment of his own cause. . This Is contrary to the most elementary rules of justice. Since the Vice President takes over the reigns
212	PIMMVENTIAG INAD1tAITY
of power when a President is found unnblo to discharge his duties, he should not, in my opinion, be put in the position of having nnything to do with the making of the crucial decision.
By a process of elimination, we are led to the conclusion that since no available governmental institution Is the appropriate agency for making a decision on the question of Presidential disability, ono must be contrived. Thus, I believe that some sort of commission or committee must be set up which can make an aut hot% Rat'Se and binding decision. The only remaining question is: Who shall par-tIcIpate in the decision?
This brings the to the details of 8. 238. I think it is extremely unwise to delegate the power to make the critical decision to a Panel of doctors. While I think any eommisslon must act on the advice of doctors, I also believe that a politically responsible commission In whose judgment the country will have cot-titlence must make the actual decision. Your own Senate Joint Resolution 134 does not make this mistake, since the special commission makes the concrete decision, though I would prefer to specify that the commission Asti net on the advice of physicians. But I am very dubious about the wisdom of posmittins members of the opposition political party to have anything to do with the decision. I should think that a decision will command greater public confldence—which, I may suggest, is probably the key to the whole problem-1f the President's ability to discharge his duties Is judged only by his own party people. I would exclude Democrats front participating in n decision regarding a Republican President, and vice versa, because of the ease with which the chnrgo of "politicking" can be bandied about. The only way to avoid the Injection of party politics in this connection, tt seems to me, Is to involve only the members of the President's own party. Surely the country will be readier to accept a decision by Republicans that a Republican President Is unnblo to dischnrge his duties than one in which Democrats had a hand.
I should add that in order to buttress public confidence in the decision of the special commission, the Supreme Court Justices ought to be Involved to the extent at least of the Chief Justice and perhaps the ranking Associate Justice.
I recommend once more that the committee be kept very small, that it be empowered to act by majority vote, that it be required to consult physicians, and make findings in writing. I would allow any member of the commission to take the Initiative in setting the machinery to work. I would authorise the commission to make findings both as regards disability and the termination of disability. The only other point to which I would draw special attention Is the fact that in all cases to date, whenever a vacancy occurred in the presidential oMce, the Vice President took over as President. This was due to the fact that in every instance the President had died. But the Vice President cannot become anything more than Acting President if he takes over merely for the duration of an ill-new since we cannot have two Presidents at the same time. Thus I think that section 1 of Senate Joint Resolution 134 is very wise in making a distinction between the situation where the Vice President serves as President, and the situation in which he merely exercises its powe. s Such a provision is absolutely essential if the problem Is to be solved, because we have no precedents dealing with temporary inability, and a solution demands that a distinction be made between the case where the President has died, or resigned, or been impeached, and the case where he la temporarily ill, and for the time being Incapacitated. If I can be of any further assistance to you in connection with this legislation, please do not hesitate to call upon toe. I am eager to help your subcommittee find a proper solution of the problem. Sincerely yours,
REPLY OF DAVID FELLMAN, THE UNIVERSITY OF WISCONSIN
DECEMBER 12, 1955.
Congressman Estssrusa. Cssiss,
House Office Building, Washington, D. C.
DEAR CONGRESSMAN Csuza: I am writing in response to your letter of November 29, in connection with your questionnaire on Presidential inability. It is interesting to note that the questions raised therein are almost identical with those raised by Chester A. Arthur in his first annual message to Congress, December 6, 1881. See Richardson, Messages and Papers of the Presidents (vol. 8,
DAVID FELLWAN,
Professor of Political Science.
PRFAIDENTIAL INABILITY	213
p. 65). Ills questions arm from the fact that President Garfield was utterly incapacitated for some 2% month. before his death. He was shot on July 2, 1881, and died on September 19. Mr. Arthur did not undertake to discuss, much lees to answer, the questions he raised.
Before coming to your specific questions, I want. to make the preliminary point that the British have a specific procedure for determining the disability of a
reigning sovereign, and that wo can learn much by examining It. It Is, of course, in any system of government a delicate problem which is extraordinarily difficult to resolve, and any solution Is bound to be something less than perfect, but nevertheless the problem is not insoluble by any means.
The British statute was adopted on March 19, 1937, and is entitled the Regency Act of 1037. (The c:tation is 1 FAlw. 8& 1 Ow. 0, ch. 10.) This statute was the result of apprehensions, which Parliament itself acknowledged, arising from the illness of Ueorgo V in 1928 and in January 1930. Those sections of this act which deal with n regency while the sovereign Is under 18 years of age need not concern um here. But section 2 of the act is pertinent. It reads.asc follows:
"(1) If the following peraons or any three or more of them, that is to say, the wife or husband of the Sovereign, the Lord Chancellor, the Speaker of the House of Commons, the Lord Chief Justice of England, and the Master of the Rolls, declare in writing that they are satisfied by evidence which shall include the evidence of physicians that the Sovereign is by reason of infirmity of mind or body incapable for the time being of performing the royal functions or that they are satisfied by evidence that the Sovereign is for some definite cause not available for the performance of those functions, then, until It Is declared in like manner that his Majesty bas so tar recovered Ills health as to warrant Ills resumption of the royal functions or has become available for the performance thereof, as the case may be, those functions shall be performed In the name and on behalf of the Soverign by a Regent."
Section 0 of the act is also pertinent. It reads as follows:
"(1) In the event of illness not amounting to such infirmity of mind or body as is mentioned in section two of this Act, or of absence or intended absence from the United Kingdom, the Sovereign may, in order to prevent delay or difficulty in the despatch of public business, by Letters Patent under the Great Seal, delegate, for the period of that tithes or absence, to Counsellors of State such of the royal functions as may be specified in the Letters Patent, and may In like manner revoke or vary any such delegation."
Subsection (2) of section 0 designates who shall serve as counselors of state: the wife or husband of the Sovereign (if the Sovereign is married) and the four persons next in line of succession to the Crown. This portion of the statute was amended on November 11, 1013 (0 and 7 (leo. 8. ch. 42) to provide that the heir apparent shall be one of the counselors of State if over 18 years of age.
I should like to focus attention on the principal features of this statute, particularly in the light of the questions raised in your questionnaire.
1. A committee of five is created to make the decision concerning the Sovereign's disability.
2. The committee need not be unanimous, but may act by majority vote.
8. One member of the committee Is the Sovereign's wife or husband; two are high-ranking judges holding office for life, the Lord Chief Justice, who is the presiding judge of Queen's Bench, and the Master of the Rolls, who presides over the court of appeals; the Lord Chancellor is at once a Cabinet minister, the presiding officer of the House of Lords, head of the judicial system, and a leading figure in the majority political party; the Speaker of the House of Commons presides over the elective body of Parliament, but it is important to note that unlike our Speaker in the Rouse of Representatives, the English Speaker is a nonpartisan presiding officer who enjoys something approaching life tenure, since be is usually reelected to the House of Commons by his constituency without opposition, and is reelected to the Speakership by the House, whatever may have been his original party affiliation, and whatever may be the party situation in the House itself. Thus, of the five persons who are eligible to serve on this committee, only the Lord Chancellor may be regarded as a party man. But It is important to note, in this connection, that the Sovereign is not a party man either.
4. The committee is required to make a finding of inability in writing on the basis of evidence which must include the evidence of physicians. The number and identity of the physicians are not specified.
214	PRFAIDENTIAL INABILITY
5. The statute Mere infirmity of both intuit and body.
lumpability of performing the royal funelions is nut defined.
T. The possibility Dint the Sovereign may be incapable for some reason other than infirmity of mind or body by not being nvallnble to perform his
functions is also taken Into consideration. What might lead to such tom availability II not specified. Presumnbly capture by a foreign enemy would be an example.
S. The statute recognizes that the Sovereign my overcome his disability by becoming well, and the eommillee declares that he has recovered his heillth so as to warrant resumption of the royal functions In the very same way that It acts to make a tindhig of disability.
it. In the ease of less serious Illness, or absence front the kingdom, the Sovereign may delegnte such powers as may be necessary to carry on the public business to a group of 11 counselors of state, his spouse and the 4 people next in the line of suceession, but he laity revoke lire delegation Ill the same manner that he made
I come now to thequestions put &WU In tie quest tont mire.
I. I do not know what time authors of the ConsIllution intended by the term "[nobility," except that they obviously intended to have the Vice President serve as Acting President during a period of Preshiential disability. Disability was never &tined, and was mentioned only earn in the debates of the (!tmstitutionni Comentlen. A search of the Records of the Federal Convention, edited by Max Farrand (New haven: Yale University Press, rev. ed., 11)37), does not yield. 11111t1. It Is of interest to hate that on August 27, 'wording to NIndison's Notes, Mr. Dickinson extuessed the thought that the seetion under discussion tuns "too vague." Ile asked: "What Is the extent of the term 'disability' and who is to be the Judge of it?" lint so far as we know, no one answered the questions, and the matter was then postponed. All other references to the disability clause are In the snecefislve drafts of the document as it devuleped in the de-liberattons of the Convention. So far as I can discover, there is no evidence that the Convention ever discussed limo questions raised by Mr. Dickinson. Whether anything was said on this subject In the State ratifying conventions I do not know, but 1 have not searched the records on This point. Perinips someone should do just that.
I think it would be extremely unwise to try to dellno the term "Inability" In legislation. Any attempted deitnitlon would, I believe, do more tin rin than good, and the more prolix the definition, the worse It would be. Any attempt to spell out Just what is meant by disability would ellher be tautological, sepal-lieu& or misleading, and in any event, n sure basis for unnecessary disputation. But the law is full of undefined and undefivable terms, e. g., "reasonable man," "due protect of law," "right and equity," etc. But certainly connuousense dictates that disability may be due either to bodily or mental IntlrinIty, and if there is any possible doubt about it, then the law should say as much. It is certainly common knowledge that mental disability occurs, and that it can he as crippling as physical disability. If a special group or committee is created to make a finding of disability, the law should provide that (1) the finding should be hi writing; (2) the dutiful; should be based on evidence; (3) the evidence should include the testimony of physicians.
Clearly the Constitution contemplates that the President may get over his disability, since it uses the phrase "until the disability is removed." Obviously a sick man may get well, and the law should be clear Olt this point, that the President resumes all of his powers when his disability is ended.
Ii, I think any member of the group or committee which would be authorized by law to determine the question of the President's inability to discharge the powers and duties of his office should be eligible to initiate the question. I do not believe Congress should undertake to perform this function, mainly because the question may arise suddenly when Congress Is not In session. Nor do I believe that such a numerous assemblage of men and women Is equipped to make a specific decision bearing upon the qualifications of a' single person upon the basis of evidence. I should think it highly Improper to entrust the Vice President with the initiative, since his personal stake in the decision precludes general confidence in the ebjectivity of any affirmative step he may take. Since the Cabinet is made up of personal appointees of the President who serve at his pleasure, I would regard the Cabinet as wholly unsuitable to make a decision of the sort under discussion. So far as the Cabinet la concerned, the cards are stacked so heavily in favor of one disposition of the issue and against the other that an objective answer based entirely upon pertinent evidence cannot be expected in all cases.
PH1,14111).NTJAI, INABILITY	216
I I I', I think Congress ought to provide for a procedure to deal with the problem of Presidential Inability, por the renown,' given above, the decision should not, In my judgment, be entrusted to Congress, or the Vice President, or the Cabinet, I suggest 111.. creation by White of n special continuing Committee which would be empowered to make the critical decision of inability. While I have not given a grant deal of thought to the mailer of the makeup of the Cone inittee. and further reflection might suggest a somewhat different composition, I would tentatively suggest, as a lauds for further discussion, as follows:
I. The Committee should be very small, so that It can act expeditiously
rind decisively. I suggest a Committee of live.
2. 'Tito members f the Committee could very well be the following:
(a) The President's epotise, or If there is none, the next of kin, pro-011ug ho or mho Is an adult.
(b) The Chief Justice of the United Mittel!.
(0) The mentor Assoc-late Justice of the Supreme Court of the United Slates.
(d) 'the leader of the President's political party In the Senate.
to) The !cotter of the President's political party in the House of Representuth-es.
Thus, much a Committee would include a member of the President's family, 2 life-tenure Justices holding positions of great prestige and public, confidence, and 2 ranking Members of the Houses of Congress. 1 would Insist that members of the political party lit opposition to the President should not be put In the post-tit of participating In the decision that the President Is tumble to discharge the duties of his office. I think there will be greater public confidence in the perticipation of two important members of the President's own party. Our situ-:Mon is quite different from that of Great Britain, whose Sovereign Is required to be tionpnrlisan. Our President is always a partisan, and It is right that be Should be a party man, since our governmental system rests upon the foundation of the party system. It is therefore altogetherproper that leader* of his own party /filmed share directly in the responsibility of making a decision of Presiden-tint inability. leaders of the opposition party would necessarily act under a heavy cloud of stispielen about their motives If they bed a hand in the matter, however much their opinions are grounded in objective, weighty, and reliable evidettee.
IV. I think a statute at the sort I have discussed in II and 1ff is perfectly eon-stitutional. Au net of Congress seems to be fully justified by the language and purposes of article II, section I, clause 6, of the United States Constitution.
V. As I have indicated, I betittve that the same body ought to have authority both to Initiate the question and determine its merits. I see no reason for setting up any ponderous or complex machinery. Oa the contrary, there Is every good reason to keep the procedure uncomplictited, so (lint a small group of responsible people commanding public confidence can move swiftly and decisively. It might be wise to authorize the Chief Justice to take the initiative of setting the machinery in motion, but I do not see why any one of the five important people who would serve on the Committee could not request a meeting of the Committee for the purpose of making n decision. For example, under some circumstances the President's wife may very well be the most suitable person available to raise the question of inability. I am sure that no one of the five persons I have in mind for service on this Committee would initiate action irrespoasibly, partly from the very nature of their positions, and partly because the public would not stand for irresponsibility in this connection.
VI. The Committee should be free to declare that the President is permanently disabled, if the facts warrant such a finding. Certainly It is common knowledge that there Is such a thing as permanent disability. And there Is no reason to believe that a Committee constituted as I bare suggested would make a finding of permanent disability If it were at all possible  to avoid doing so. If the disability is temporary, the Committee should be authorized, by the same procedure utilized to make a finding of disability, to make a finding that the President Is sufficiently well to resume his duties and functions.
VII. If the disability is temporary, I think, as I have indicated, that any member of the Committee should be authorized to raise tliciquestion that the disability has ceased to exist. Once the question has been raised, it should be determined by a majority vote of the Committee. As in the case of findings of disability, a finding that the disability has ended should be made in writing, on the basis of evidence, incindlng the evidence of physicians.
216	PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY
VIII. The question whether, in the event of a finding of temporary disability, the Vice President would succeed to the powers and duties of the office, or to the
office itself, is in my Judgment the critical question on the list. For there is a
wide gulf between what I think was the plain intention of the framers of the Constitution and actual practice in the several instances when Vice Presidents
took over upon the death of a I'resldent. The Constitution declares, in article
II, section 1, clause 6, that "In case of the removal of the President from Office, or of his death, resignation or inability to discharge the powers and duties of said
Office, the same shall devolve on the Vice President • • *." Clearly, the term "the same" refers to "the powers and duties of said Office." If it was intended that the Vice President should become President, it would have been a simple matter to say so, as it is said in section 3 of the 20th amendment. This view is supported by other language in the Constitution. Thus, in the same paragraph it is provided that in case both the President and Vice President are unavailable for the office, Congress shall declare "what officer shall then act as President." This language is consistent with the previous part of the paragraph; it does not say that this officer shall be President, but only that he shall act as President, "until the disability be removed, or a President shall be elected." Note that this clause does not say, "until another President shall be elected," or Aintil the next President shall be elected," but only "until a President shall be elected."
All other pertinent clauses in the Constitution are consistent with the language of article II, section 1, clause 6. The 12th amendment, taking note of the fact that it might happen that neither the electoral college nor the House of Representatives may succeed in electing a new President in time, provides that "the Vice President shall act as President, as in the case of the death or other constitutional disability of the President." Article I, section 8, clause 5, of the Constitution provides that the Senate shall elect a President pro tempore who shall preside in the absence of the Vice President, "or when he shall exercise the Office of President of the United States." Note that it does not say, "when he shall have become President," which would have been very easy to say, if such had been the intention of those who wrote the Constitution.
The language of the Constitution, that the Vice President succeeds to the powers and duties of the President, or acts as President, or exercises the office of President, supports the view that it was not intended that he should become President. Furthermore, this is consistent with the requirements of a situation where the President's disability is only temporary. Obviously it makes more sease to say that for the duration of such a disability the Vice President shall act as President, than to say that for this period of time he shall be President, for in the latter event we would have two Presidents at the same time, which is ridiculous. But it makes sense if, while the President is too sick to discharge his duties, we have an Acting President in the person of the Vice President. Of course no such problem is posed if the President dies, or resigns, or is removed from office by impeachment, for in such cases be ceases to be President at all, and no difficulty arises it the succeeding Vice President becomes President. The real harm has been that because he Is now regarded as becoming President, a solution of the problem posed by temporary Presidential disability has been frustrated.
It is only constitutional custom which decrees that when the Vice President takes over, he becomes President. This custom, of course, is due to the fact that in the seven instances where the Vice President has taken over, he did so on the death of the President. The Presidency has never been vacated in any other way. It will be recalled than when President William Henry Harrison died, on April 4,1841, only a month after his inauguration, and Vice President John Tyler succeeded him, there was considerable debate over the question whether Tyler became President or only Acting President. But Tyler had no doubt about it, and from the outset insisted that he was the President. The country accepted the decision, and thus every succeeding Vice President who went to the White House on the death of the President became President in the full sense of the term. Thus, when President Roosevelt died, Vice President Truman became President of the United States; and, as every preceding Vice President in the same situation did, he took a separate oath of office when he assumed the Presidency. This point is fully canvassed in Herbert W. Horwill, The Usages of the American Constitution (Oxford University Press, 1025), chapter III, Accidental Presidents.
Custom has established the proposition that when a President dies the Vice President becomes President. But since we have no custom dealing with a situation created by the temporary disability of the President, I think it is altogether reasonable if a distinction is made by legislation between the two situations.
PRESIDFXTIAL INABILITY	217
We can continue on the assumption that in case the President dies, the Vice President becomes President; while at the same time we provide that in case of a temporary disability he shall serve only as Acting President, and that upon his recovery the President will reassume the powers and duties of his office. Legislation to this effect would be clearly conristent with the language and intent of article II, section 1, clause O. As Acting President the Vice President would have all the powers of the office, such as the veto and appointive powers, but be would have to relinquish these powers upon the recovery of the President.
IX. If a finding of permanent disability is made, I should think the Vice President would succeed to the office itself, and not merely to its powers and duties, just as he succeeds to the office if the President dies, as is now decreed by our "unwritten Constitution." It may of course be assumed that the committee which is authorised to make findings of disability will in the nature of things be extacinely reluctant to make a finding of permanent disablity, and that so long as any ray of hope exists the country would expect that the disability be regarded as temporary, if it is at all possible so to designate It. However, there is such a condition as permanent disability, aryl in that event I would think the existing constitutional custom would control. There does not seem to be any very good reason why It should not.
X. In the event of a finding of permanent disability, I believe the language of the Constitution, "or a President shall be elected," does not require but only authorizes the immediate election of a new President. Clearly this clause permits Congress to say, for example, that if as much as 2 years of the term still remain, there shall be a new election. Whether Congress ought to use this power, and provide for special elections, is therefore, in my judgment, a matter of policy and not of constitutional principle. My own feeling is that, In the light of our complicated State and Federal laws dealing with elections, the pattern of primary selections, the structure of party conventions, etc., our institutions are not geared to holding presidential elections except according to the sequence of events that occur according to the normal rhythm of the Constitution. But if there should be a special election, I should think that it would be merely for the unexpired term of the disabled President, for otherwise the sequence of events upon which the Constitution operates would be disturbed.
XI. I believe that Congress has authority to enact legislation on all the questions raised here under the Constitution as it now stands, and that constitutional amendments are not necessary. Such legislation, based upon the language and purposes of the relevant constitutional clauses, would be justified by normal canons of constitutional construction.
I would like to add several thoughts :
1. If legislation on this subject is to be drafted, attention should be given to the fact that a Vice President serving as Acting President may also become unable to discharge the duties and powers of the position. The legislation should therefore extend to anyone serving as Acting President, whether it be the Vice President, or the Speaker of the House of Representatives, or the President pro tempore of the Senate, or anyone else.
2. State constitutions usually provide for the contingency that the governor may be so ill as to unable to discharge his duties, and the lieutenant governor is authorized to act as governor. This has happened often. The experience with gubernatorial disability must by now be a considerable one, in the aggregate, and perhaps there is much we may be able to learn from such experience. I suggest that the committee staff make a study of gubernatorial disability,or, alternatively, the Legislative Reference Service can be requested to do so. Such a study might very well shed a great deal of light upon the problem, and tell us something about what the American people are willing to put up with. I know of no such study available in print today.
3. If legislation is prepared on this subject, I believe it would be wise to take into the account the possibility that the President may be unable to discharge his duties for some reason other than Illness. That is to say, in the larger sense, the problem is one of unavailability as well as one of inability in the medical sense. I do not believe that it would be either wise or necessary to try to spell out the situations that might conceivably arise in which the President would be unable to discharge the duties of his office. It is sufficient if the statute made some provision on the subject, so that the necessary adjustments can be taken legally, and with a minimum of dispute or lost motion when necessary. Suppose, for example, a President were kidnaped, or captured by an enemy army/ I do not anticipate either of these things ever happening, but since it is at least theoretically possible for the President to be unavailable for a variety of nnfore-
218	PRESIDENTIAL INAillbiTY
DAVID FELLYAN,
Professor of Political Science.
Senator ICEPAI'Velt. A letter front Prof. Mark I). I Imre, of Ifervard
Law School, which will be made a pea of the record.
(The material referred to is as follows:)
t..kw :know. er ilARVARD UNIVERSITY,
Vatahrirlye, Mass., January 20, 1058.
lion. ESTES KEE'AVVE.R,
Committee on the Judiciary,
United Slates Senate, Washington, D. V.
My MAR SEsssee Ksrst,vse: I have received your letter of Jnnunry 10 concerning the matter of Presidential inability. The enclosed ropy of a letter which I addressed to 00111IteSSUMII Cheller 800102 years ago summarises the views which I then held and which today I still maintain. There are but two specific points on which I appreciate this opportunity to say a further word.
It Is my earnest hope that neither by constitutional amendment nor by legislative action will any attempt be made to involve the Supremo Oourt or any of its Justices In the adjudication of the issues of inability. It seems to me clenr that an effort by statute to make the Chief Justice or any of his associates a participant in the resolution of that issue would be unconstitutional. That fact reflects not merely a settled rule of law but a wise policy of government. 1 should, therefore, greatly regret any effort to alter the rule of law, for If that were done we should jeopardise the tradition which separates, so far as possible. our Federal judiciary from participation in the resolution of political issues.
The other point which I should like to emphasize, though of leaser importance, seems to me to be of some significance. Believing as 1 do that under the Con-stitullon as presently written there is adequate congressional authority to make provision for the devolutton of the powers and duties of the Presidential office I should oppose the effort to put the formulation of principle In the form of a constitutional amendment. I think that the position which I summarised in my letter to Mr. Celler adequately Indicates the reason for this belief, I realize that there has been much discussion of the problem during the last 2 years. I still remain convinced, however, that it would be inadvisable to seek a constitutional answer to what is essentially a legislative question.
Respectfully yours,
lion. EMANUSL CELIES,
Committee on the Judiciary,
House of Representative*, Wash higton, D. C.
Mr HEAR CONGIUDSEMAN: Since receiving your questionnaire on Presidential inability I hare been turning the problem over in my mind. It is not, I am sorry to say, a question on which I feel myself peculiarly qualified to speak and my thoughts, accordingly, are essentially casual. Because you have asked for an expression of my views, however, I shall do my best to formulate them.
Of basic Importance, In my judgment, is recognition of the fact that any attempt to find a single answer to the unpredictable contingencies of the future would be seriously mistaken. This principle leads me to believe that It would be most unfortunate to attempt by any means to define "inability". It seems to me that it is better to preserve the vagueness of the constitutional provision than to attempt to achieve an undesirable, and perhaps an unattainable precision. It seems to me, for instance, that an inability which might present major problems If it should occur at the beginning of a President's term of office might involve no truly significant issues for the Government if it should arise during the concluding months of his administration. To produce a single definition and to seek a single answer for problems which the accidents of time make essentially different would seem to me most unfortunate. I should, therefore, be
seen endi)erhapa unforeseeable mewls, the statute ought to cover patch contin• metes. It 0111 he done in a simple phrase, ns It is (how in the English Regency Act,
If I can he of any further service to the committee, please do not hesitate to call upon me.
Minverely yours,
MARK beIV. JANUARY 19, 1030.
PREB1DENTIAL INABILITY	219
opposed to nn effort In define "Mobility" by /dollar, constitutional amendment, or otherwise.
To say this, however, in not to my that no notion Is desirable at the present time. In my judgment it is desirable Mot Congress by joint resolution or by statute, but in any rage wllh the President's concurrence, should' assert one basic principle concerning the problem of Inability. That principle is that the power to inquire and ultimately to decide whether Inability, temporary or permanent, exists, In to be exercised by the Congress. In my judgment the Vice President Is clearly dbapinlbled for interest front initiating or determining this issue. I rcalire that the site of the Cabinet would. on the face on II, make it a more appropriate body than Congress to determine whether the President is tilde to execute his powers. On the other hand, I believe that the intimate association between the President and his Cabinet waken it an inappropriate daily 10 deride the matter. i should see no renown why the Cabinet might not initiate emigres-shoed actIon, but 1 take it that no statute or resolution need assert that right.
I believe it important, however, that Congress should, before the issue arises, assert Its respounlbility to determine the fact of Inability and its determination that the eonsequencen of inability wilt be resolved by congressionnl aelion, within the constitution, in the light of eiremnstoncen as they exist when action in nsitilred.
From what I hate said I take it that you will understand that I believe that
II would be unwise to attempt in advance to stale by whom the President's powers are to be exercised during his inability. A solution appropriate when the Nation Is at pram might be totally inappropriate when It is at war. An I have already suggested, the course advinntile at the beginning of a President's term of office might well be entirely unsuitable If his inability should occur near the end of his term.
Behind my particular answers to your questions lies a strong conviction with respect to our constitutional system. That is the belief that the framers of the Constitution showed great wisdom in their fidelity to generalities. I feel sure that If we now seek to provide rules for matters which they preferred to dispose of by principle we will jeopardise the future. it is far wiser to leave some quve lions unsettled for in doing so we preserve for later generations the power to resolve their own problems in accordance with'their own needs. I should allow this principle to govern action with respect to the problem of the nature of the Vice President's Powers when the Congress has determined that the President Is permanently or temporarily disabled. I therefore believe it unwise to seek a present resolution of the 8th, 0th, and 10th questions presented in your questionnaire.
From everything that i have said you Will realize that I believe that the Congress possesses today the sob power which it seems to me to be desirable for It to exercise. That Is the power to assert an exclusive authority over the matter of a President's inability. I believe that such an assertion of authority, concurred in by the President, would serve usefully to clarify an important issue and would do so without imposing unfortuhate limitations on an authority .which should be largely unlimited.
Respectfully yours,
HARK DEW. lows, Professor of /.are.
Senator XEFAIIVER. I have a letter from the Women's National
Republican Club, Inc., which will be made a part of the record.
(The material referred to is as follows:)
WOMEN'S NATIONAL REPUBLICAN CLUB, INC.,
New York, N. Y., January IS, 1958.
lion. ESTES KEFAUVEB.
United States Senate,
Washington, D. C.'
MAR Simms KEPAUVER The nationwide membership of the Women's National Republican Club'has approved by referendum a resolution:
"That the Women's National Republican Club urges Congress to take immediate and decisive action to provide legislation designed to make it absolutely clear as to who would decide that a President is not able to carry out his duties."
We are following the administration's lead in recommending that a law be passed early in the session, concerning delegation of presidential powers. We
220	PlIFIRDENTIAL INABILITY
should like to see spelled out by legislation, clearly and without ambiguous
phrases, what individual or groups of individuals would be authorized under
the law to declare a Chief Executive disabled.
We have pleasure In transmitting to you this resolution.
Sincerely yours,
Diritielel W. ALEXANDER
Mrs, Stewart F. Alexander,
President,
JAOQUILINC I3. OUTWILLIO
Mrs. William S. Outwillig,
Chairman, Committee on National Legtetotien.
Senator KEFAUVER. We have a study about this whole problem which has been conducted by the Foreign Affairs Division of the Library of Congress, which has a lot of interesting background. It shows, among other things, what has been done by constitutions of other nations. That will be made a part of the record.
(The material referred to is as follows:)
PIXISIDINTIAL DISABILITY : PRovisioNs IN FOREIGN CONSTITUTIONS—A BRIEF
RaviEw
CONTENTS
I. Introduction.
II. The Chief ExeCutive.
Executive power.
IV, Presidential disability: Latin American constitutions.
V. Concluding comments.
Annex.
Presidential disability: Constitution of the Confederate States of America.
L 1NTBODUOTION '
Among the world's seine 236 billion human beings there are now approximately 91 political entities which claim national sovereignty, and are in greater or Lesser degree recognised as sovereign. Of the total, approximately 90 percent possess written constitutions containing the outline and the definition of the powers and functions of the organs of the government. Although the precedents and traditions embodied in current constitutions may date back many years, a high percentage of the documents themselves are of relatively recent origin. For example, about 45 percent were drafted within the past decade and about 70 percent are less than a quarter of a century old. The United States, strange as it may seem for such a relatively young nation, has the oldest of all written constitutions proently In effect
IL Till CHUB Extotrrnx
The functions and powers of government in the majority of the nations are divided into the three major areas of executive, legislative, and judicial. Some 41 countries, or about 48 percent of the total number of nations, give the title "President" to the Chief Executive of the nation, namely, Argentina, Austria, Bolivia, Brazil, Burma, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Czechoslovakia, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Finland, France, Germany, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Korea, Lebanon, Liberia, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Portugal, Syria, Turkey, United States of America, Venezuela, and Yugoslavia.
Royal personages are designated as Chiefs in the executive hierarchy in the constitutions of some 28 countries, or about 31 percent of the nations: Afghanistan. Australia (the British Crown), Belgium, Bhutan, Cambodia, Canada (the British Crown), Ceylon (the British Crown), Denmark, Ethiopia, Greece, Iran,
'Prepared by Mary Shepard, Foreign Affairs Division, Legislative Reference Service, the Library of Congress, Washington. 0. C., January 23.1958.
e This review relies heavily throughout on Amos J. Peasle's Constitutions of Nations, 2d edition. The Hague, Hartle:tug Nijhoff, 1956.
PRESIDFZITIAL INABILITY	221
Iraq, Jordan,
Laos, Libya, Luxembourg, Monaco, Muscat and Oman, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand (the British Crown), Norway, Saudi Arabia, Sweden, Thailand, the Union of South Africa (the British Orown), the United Kingdom, and Yemen. A governor general acts for the Crown in the majority of the members of the British Commonwealth.
The executive authority is vested in a collective body, sometimes called a Council, or the Government, or Praealdium, in Albania, Bulgaria, Egypt, Hun- gary, Poland, Rumania, Switzerland, the Union of Soviet SoLialist Republica, Uruguay, and a few others.
Selection of the Chief Executive is by popular vote of the people In these 28 countries: Argentina, Austria, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Dominican Republic Ecuador, El Salvador, Finland, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Iceland, Indonesia, Ireland, Liberia, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Portugal, Uruguay, and Venezuela. In the United States presidential electors, elected by the people, in turn elect the President.
The legislative branch of the Government selects the Chief Executive in the following countriee, among others: Albania, Bulgaria, Burma, Ozechoelovakia, France, Germany, Hungary, Israel, Italy, Japan, Korea, Lebanon, Poland, Rumania, Spain, Switzerland, Syria, Turkey, U. N. N. It, and Yugoslavia.
Fark.UTIvE pOwea
So-called cabinet government, where principal Executive power is vested In a cabinet•reaponsibie to the tegisIature,els found among many nations of the free world, notably the members of the British Commonwealth. Among the dictatorships also many constitutions contain provisions for the dismissal or resignation of the heads of the executive administration (the equivalent of the prime minister and his cabinet) if the legislative body ceases to support them In the constitutions of 48, or about 64 percent of all nations, Executive power is made subject to the legislature. Included among these are the constitutions of Albania, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Burma, Cambodia, Canada, Ceylon, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ilungary, India, Iran, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Lebanon, Laos, Libya, Netherlands, Norway, New Zealand, Pakistan, Poland, Rumania, Sweden, Syria, Thailand, Turkey, Union of South Africa, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the United Kingdom, and Yugosla
In the constitutions of 28 countries the terms of office of the Executive powers are made independent of the legislature, and the ministers beading the various departments of the executive branch are made answerable to the 'Executive Power- This is so in Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Oolombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Czechoslovakia, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Iceland, Korea, Liberia, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Para. guay, Peru, Philippines, Portugal, Switzerland, United States of America, Uruguay, and Venezuela.
Systems comparable to that of the United States, where major Executive power is vested in one person, the President, who is elected directly or Indirectly by the people and controls the Cabinet, are found principally among the Latin American States. The constitutions of all of these have been influenced by that of the United States. In the postwar era the constitutions of some of the new countries, the Philippines and Korea for example, base also drawn largely on it and reflect the basic outlines of the American governmental system. It is among these constitutions that the best basis for a comparative analysis of procedures for coping with Presidential disability exists.
IV. PaEaIDE.NTIAL DISABILITY: LATIN AILEBIOAN CON8TITUTIONa
Following are some questions relating to Presidential disability to which answers are sought in Latin American constitutions :
I. What persons or agencies should initiate the question of the President's inability to discharge the powers and duties of this °peel What persons or agencies should determine that a Presidential disability Grist*? Should a distinction be made between permanent and temporary disability? If so, how?
In only a few of the Latin American constitutions are these aspects of the disability of an executive touched upon and even then with teas than adequacy.
*gee annex for excerpts quoted from Latin American conitItatioal.
2111114,414111
222	PRMIDENTIAL INABILITY
In general, two modes of procedure are provided: First, it is left to the President himself to Wee the question of his own inability; second, the Congress Is designated to determine disability. A distinction is usually made between temporary and permanent disability, or absence from office, with correspomling distinctions in procedure.
The Colombian Constitution, for example, provides that "The President may, on account of ill health, retire, for such tine As may be necessary, from the exercise of the executive powor" by giving due notice to the Renate or, in recess of the Senate, to the Supremo Court. If there is an nbsolute default of the President in his first 2 years, now elections are called by the substitute President. In the Costa Rican Constitution the President mny enll upon either of two Vice Presidents to replace him In his temporary absence but the line of succession comes into effect nutometteally if the absence is permanent. Under the Dominican Constitution, a lino of succession is provided for during either a temporary absence or permanent vacancy, with no specifications as to who should determine a temporary or permanent disability. However, the President may, by decree, empower a designated Secretary of State who fulfills the renditions required for President to exercise the Executive power temporarily. In the Venezuelan Constitution the President is empowered to fill temporary vacancies in the Office of President by a Minister of the Notional Executive Office designated by him.
The Congress is made the responsible initiating agency in the Constitutions at Ecuador and Peru. In the former it is provided that the President ceases to exercise his functions if he abandons Ills office or demonstrates permanent physical or mental incapacity, as declared by the Congress. If limo Congress is in recess, the Council of State is empowered to call to office provisionally the substitute President, it it considers that the President Is physically or mentally incapacitated, at the Slime time convoking a special session of the Congress. The Council of State is composed of the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, a Sena tor, a Deputy, the Attorney General, the Comptroller General, the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Elections, and five other persons. However, the Council is not allowed to consider Presidential incapacity except In response to a written petition of the Supreme Court, accompanied by supporting documents. In Peru the Presidency of the Republic is declared to be vacated In the case, among others, of the permanent physical or moral incapacity of the President as declared by Congress. The exercise of the Presidency is suspended by the temp orery physical incapacity of the President as declared by Congress. In case of vacancy, Congress elects a President for the rest of the Presidential period.
In most cases a substitute President is called upon to act until the disability is removed, in the interim of an absence, or for the duration of the impediment. In at least two instances, however, a definite limitation is placed on the time a President may be absent on the basis of temporary disability without losing the Presidency, permanently or temporarily. The Ecuadorian Constitution stipulates that, "If the reason which incapacitates the President from exercising his position endures more than 0 months, the person replacing him • • • shall complete the Presidential term. Under the Mexican Constitution if the disability of the President exceeds 30 days Congress may consider his leave of absence and decide on the appointment of a President ad interim.
E. Who should act as substitute or how should a Prestdential vacancy be filled in case of temporary or permanent disability?
Latin American constitutions provide for three broad lines of procedure in designating a substitute President. In a number, the example of the United States is followed in naming the Vice President as the official who should take over it the President is disabled. Other constitutions authorize a line of succession beginning with some other official of the Government. Still others provide for the election of a substitute, either by the Congress or the people themselves. In addition, variations it the same constitution may exist as to !MOM-slon depending upon whether the disability is permanent or temporary. In some cases a line of succession may be established for several substitutes and, in default of these, an election may be called for..
The Costa Rican Constitution authorizes the two Vice Presidents to replace the President in the event of a permanent absence, to succeed in the order of their nomination. If he is only temporarily absent the President may call upon either of the Vice Presidents to replace him. In Cuba, the Vice President substitutes for the President and following in the line of succession are the Prot-debt of Congress and, temporarily, the oldest Justice of the Supreme Court.
•
PRESIDENTIAL MARMITE	228
When the Justice succeeds, a national election is called unless the vacancy occurs in the last year of the PresidenUal term, in which case be holds office until the end of the term. In El Salvador, the Vice President I./places the President upon the letter's temporary or permanent disability. It he cannot succeed, designates elected by the Congress substitute in the order of their selection. If all of these are unavailable the Assembly designates a person to assume office. In Honduras, the line of succession to the Presidency in the event of the tem• porary or permanent disability of the President lies with the Vice President, the President of the National Congress, and the President of the Supreme Court. However, if both the President and Vice President are per:nanently unavailable, the substitute President must cell for an election. The Constitution of Panama Ukelele° provides for the substitution by one of the Vice Presidents in the order in which they were elected, in case of a temporary or permanent absence of the President. Next In line of succession comes one of the Ministers of State.
Other constitutions provide various lines of succession. In Chile, when the President cannot exercise his office he is substituted by the ministers in turn, with the title of Vice President, whom the order of precedence as fixed by law may designate. Following these In the line come the President of the Senate, the President of the Chamber of Deputies and the President of the Supreme Court. When the Presidential absence from office cannot be ended before the completion of the time remaining of the constitutional period, elections are called by the Vice President. The Colombian Constitution empowers the Con- gress to elect a designate every 2 years to take the place of the President in default of the latter. In the absence of the designate the Executive Office would be filled by the Ministers in the order established by law and then the Governors. However, If the default of the President is permanent, the substitute President must call for elections within the three months following, the President so elected to serve for the rest of the period. In Ilia Dominican Constitution the line of succession during a temporary or permanent absence of the President is as follows: Secretary of State for War and Navy; Secretary of State for the Interior and Police; Secretary of State for the Presidency. It these fall, the President of the Supreme Court assumes the role temporarily until the National Assembly names a pertnanent substitute. The Haitian Constitution departs from the norm by authorising the Council of Secretaries of State to assume executive power if the President finds It temporarily Impossible to perform his duties but in case of vacancy of the office the void is temporarily filled by the President of the Court of Cessation, or the Vice President, or the senior Judge of the Court of Cessation who shall convoke the Primary Assemblies for the election, within 4 months, of a President. The Nicaraguan Constitution em• powers the President of the Republic to appoint a Designate who can substitute for him if ho is unable to serve. If the Designate is also unable to serve the Presidency passes to a successor elected by the Congress from among its membership. In Venezuela, it is provided that temporary vacancies in the office of President of the Republic shall be filled by a Minister of the National Executive Office to be designated by him. Other procedures, noted below, are provided in ease of inability to serve, presumably permanent.
Several constitutions place the responsibility directly on the Congress for filling a temporary or permanent vacancy in the Presidency. In Mexico, for example, it the President is permanently disabled during his last 4 years in office (the Presidential term is 6 years) the Congress acts as an electoral college and, subject to the attendance of at least two-thirds of its membership, elects a substitute President by majority vote (and secret ballot). If the permanent disability occurs within the first 2 years the Congress by the same procedure elects a President ad interim who acts until a new President is elected by popular vote to finish the term. In case of a temporary disability Congress, or the permanent committee, if Congress is not in session, designates an Acting President to eerie. The permanent committee is composed of 20 deputies and senators acting during congressional recesses. After 30 days of a Presidential disability the Congress considers what further action shall be taken. The Paraguayan Constitution calls for the National Assembly to appoint the minister or functionary to exercise the Presidency until the end of the term if the inability occurs within the last 3 years of the term. If it occurs within the first 2 years, new Presidential elections are held. In case of temporary inability, the Assembly appoints one of the Ministers provisionally to exercise the Presidency. Under the Peruvian Constitution if the Presidency of the Republic becomes vacant, by reason of permanent physical or moral incapacity, the Congress is empowered to elect a President (by secret vote and absolute
224	PRIUMBIDMIAL INABILITY
majority) for the rest of the PresiOntial term. In Venezuela, in the event of the inability of the President the National Congress elects a President by an nbaointe minority vote, to serve until the end of the Presidential term. Temporary vacancies are idled in the inanenr noted above.
3. Should the nullity of a permanent or temporary disability during the course of a providential term affect the procedures to be followed!'
In the majority of the Latin American constitutions, as In that of the United :tildes, the mime procedures ate followed for tilling a presidential vacancy caused by disability whether the vacancy occurs early or lnte during n presidentinl term. There are a few exceptions. tinder the Colombian constitution, if there Is ma Absolute default of the President during the first 2 years of his term, new elections are called to choose a President to serve for the rest of the term. If, how• ever, the defnult occurs during the last 2 years, the line of succession established in the Constitution enter into effect. The same thing holds true In Paraguay. In Mexico. If a permanent disability wenn% within the first 2 yearn of the 8-year term a new presidential election is called to be held at least 14 months and not more than 18 months lifter the call Is made, an ad interim President acting In the meanwhile. If the permanent disability occurs during the last 4 years, the Congrem elects a substitute President. In some instances, such as In
Cuba, and Pananin. if the Vice President is unable to substitute, new presidential elections are called if the presidential term has more than a year or two to rum. In some Cases a new nuindate from the people is provided for when n penna-mead disability occurs, whenever that may he during the presidential term, either by a new election for President by the people tan in ('hile) or by the Congress Haiti and Peru).
I. Should the foes that a }arson ;UM twird as substitute !Walden, bar him from seeking the presidency?
Apart from the question of the number of terms n President himself allay be allowed, a number of the Win American constitutions pronounce against per-miffing n substitute President front subsequently seeking the presidency, at least Immediately. }'or example. the Vitban Constitution Mattes that the person occupying the presidency by reason of substitution "cannot be a candidate at the following election." The El Salvador Conalittition goes a little bit farther and provides that nuyone who has occupied the presidency "may not he President, Vice Pmitlent. or designate during the following presidential term." The Mexican Constitution is the most emphatie of all, proclidining that "No citizen who has acted as President, elected by popular vote, or appointed as substitute, or provisions, President, or President ad interim can ever, in any event or for whatsoever reason, again occupy this past." It should lie noted, however, that the majority of the constitutions are silent on this score.
V. CONCLUDINO COM MIKATt;
Even this brief review may suffice to show that there are Important contingencies relating to Pre identbd disability that have not been adequately met in many of the Latin American constitutions, just as there are in our own. Indeed, this is not surprising since these constitutions owe much of their inspiration to that of the United States. Although a line of succession of procedures for choosing a substitute are provided In nil the constitutions, in only a few is it made clear who shall initiate the question of a President's Inability or determine that a disability exists. The question of what organs or persons shall determine when a disability has ceased to exist is similarly clouded.
There are. notwithstanding, Latin American procedures that could be examined with profit in general studies of the problems of Presidential inability: for example, the procedures provided in some of these countries for a substitute President to receive some kind of a mandate front the people at the time of the succession, at least when the Presidential disability occurs toward the beginning of a Prtvtldential term.
PAMIRS:Mtn INASITATY	226
ANNIADC
DIRARILITY: LATIN AMERICAN CONSTITUTIONS
PRINCIPAL PROVISIONS
Argentina:1. 	Constitution of Nay 1, 1853
Articte 75.—In case of sickness, absence from the country, death, resignation, or removal of the President, the executive power shall be exercised by the Vice-President of the nation. In cape Of removal, death, resignation or inability of the President and Vim-President of the nation, Qmgress shall determine what official shall net as president until the disability Is removed or a new president in elected.
Z. Bolivia: Constitution of November 2.t, 1945 (as amended)
Article 91.—Should the President of the Republic he unable to fulfill his duties or remain temporarily absent, either before or after the proclamation, he shall be replaced In the interim by the Me-President, and, if the latter is not available, by the president of the Senate or by the president of the Chamber of Deputies, if the latter cannot net.
The Vice-President shall occupy the Presidency of the Republic, should this remain vacant, either before or after the proclamation of the election of the President, and shall act as President until the end of the constitutional period. It there is no VIce-Preeldent, the president-elect of the Semite will act in his stead, Or, if the latter cannot act, the president of the Chamber of Deputies Audi act ne President. In the tatter case. and provided that not over three years of the presidential term have elapsed, a new election for President and
Vice-Preeldent	be held, hitt only Incomplete said 'eriod.
3. Brazil: Constitution of September f4, 1946
Article 79.—The President shall be replaced. in case of impediment, and succeeded, in ease of vacancy in office, by the Vice President of the Republic.
I. In ease of Impediment or vacancy lu office of the President and of the Vice-President of the Republic, the President of the Chamber of Deputies, the vice president of the Federal Senate, and the president of the Federal Supreme Court shall be successively called to the exercise of the presidency.
4. Chile: Constitution of September 18,1923 (as amended)
Article CO.—When the l'reaident of the Republic In person commands the armed forces, or when from Illness, absence from the territory of the Republic, or from any other weighty reason, he cannot exercise his office, the minister, whom the order of precedence an fixed by law may designate, shall substitute for him under the title of Vice President of the Republic. In default of such, the minister who follows in the order of precedence, and in default of all the ministers, the President of the Senate, the president of the Chamber of Deputies or the president of the Supreme Court successively.
In case of death, or declaration of there being cause for resignation, or other kind of absolute impossibility, which cannot be ended before the completion of the time remaining of the constitutional period, the Vice President in the first ten days of hie incumbency shall issue the ()toper orders to proceed, within the period of sixty days, to a new election of President in the manner prescribed by the Constitution and by the electoral law.
5. Colombia: Constitution of February 16, 1945 Oath amendments)
Article 123.—The Senate may grant to the President a temporary leave of absence.
The President may, on account of ill health, retire, for such time as may be necessary, from the exercise of the executive power; but notice thereof shall be given by him in due time to the Senate, or, in recess of the Senate, to the Supreme Court.
Article 164.—The Congress shall every two years elect a designate, who shall take the place of the President In default of the latter.
The term of the designate begins the seventh of August of the respective year. Article 125.—When, for any reason, the Congress may have failed to elect a designate, the designate last elected shall continue to act in that capacity. In
aPeasiee. Amos J. Constitutions of Nations. 24 edition. The Gigue, llattlons
1036. Guatemala is not Included In this compilation. since It Is not operating at present
under a regular roaelitatIon.
226	PBESIDZINTIAL INABILITY
the absence of the designate, the executive office AMR be tilled by the ministers, in the order established by law, and in default thereof by the governors, the latter being called according to the proximity of their respective residences to the capital of the Republic.
Article 120.—The person in charge of the executive office shall hove the same privileges and exercise the same powers as the President whose position ho fills.
Article 127.-1n case of absolute default of the President of the Republic, the person charged with the presidency shall call elections for within the third month following, The President so elected shall serve for the rest of the period.
The person charged with the presidency shall continue exercising It when two years or less of the period remain without calling new elections.
6. Costa Rica: Constitution o/ November 8, 1949
Article M.—Thera shall bo two Vice Presidents of the Republic who shall replace the President during his complete absence, in the order of their nomination. During his temporary absence, the President may call upon either Vice President to replace him.
If neither Vice President can fill the temporary or permanent absence of the President, the position shall be held by the President of the Legislative Assembly.
7. Cuba: Comstftlaion of July 6,1940
Article 118.—The Vice President of the Republic shall substitute for the President in eases of absence, incapacity, or death. It the vacancy is definitive, the substitution shall continuo until the end of the presidential term. in case of absence, incapacity, or death of both, the president of Congress shell substitute
•	for them for the rest of the term.
Article 149.—In any case in which the presidential substitutes established by this Constitution are lacking, the presidency of the Republic shall be temporarily occupied by the oldest Justice of the Supremo Court, who shall call a 'lanolin' election to be held within a period of not more than ninety days.
When the vacancy occurs in the last year of the presidential term, the substitute Justice shall hold office until the term ends.
The person occupying the presidency by reason of any of the substitutions referred to in the preceding Articles cannot be a presidential candidate nt the following election.
S. Dominican Republic: Constitution of January 10, 1047
Article 31.—In case the President of the Republic is temporarily absent the executive power shall be exercised during his absence by the secretary of state for war and the navy; in the absence of the latter, by the secretary of state for the interior and police, and it both are absent, by the secretary of state for the Presidency. In case of permanent vacancy, the Presidency for the remainder of the term shall be occupied by the person invested with the office of secretary of state for war and navy; in default of him, by the person invested with the office of secretary of state for the interior and police; and In default of both, by the person invested with the office of secretary of state for the presidency.
These secretaries of state must always figure In the law which establishes them, and to exercise their functions the same conditions shall be required as for President of the Republic.
Artic/c 52.—By virtue of n decree of the President of the Republic, and while this is not revoked by another decree, a secretary of state designated by him and possessing the conditions required by the Constitution to become President of the Republic may also exercise the executive power temporarily.
Article 66.—In case of default of the substitutes provided for in Article 51, the president of the Supreme Court of Justice shall assume the executive power in the interim, and, within thirty days of the date on which he assumed these functions, shall convoke the National Assembly to name a permanent substitute in a seAsion that may not close or declare a recess until it shall have concluded the election. In case it is not convoked within these thirty days, the National Assembly shall convene In Its own right to carry out the election in the manner provided for above.
9. Ecuador: Constitution of December it, 1946
Article 87.—The functions of the President of the Republic are tinnily terminated: by the end of the term fixed in the Constitution; by death, dismissal and acceptance of renunciation; by abandonment of office or by permanent physical or mental incapacity, declared by the Congress.
•	•	•	•	•	•	•
PR HSI DI•UkIT IAL INAt1HAYTY	227
If, when Congress Is in recess, the council of state considers with reason that there has been nn abandonment of office on the pert of the President, or that ho is physically or mentally Incapacitated, the said council shall cell to office provisionally the respective substitute and shall by the seine act convoke a special session of the Congress to the end that it issue the proper resolution.
Physical or mental Incapacity may not bo considered by the council of state except by virtue of a written petition of the Supremo (curt, which shall be accompanied by the documents establishing the facts complained of.
'that which is said In this article with respect to the President of the Republic shall apply, In turn, to anyone occupying the presidency.
Article 88.—Whenever, either definitively or temporarily, there Is no titular or elected President of the Republic in Wilco, the °film shall fall to the Vice-President of the Republic.
Article 89.—If there also be no Vico•President, either definitely or temporarily, the presidency of the Republic shell ho exercised by one of the following officers in the follow lag order:
(1) The President of the House of Deputies;
(2) The vice-president of the Senate;
(3) The vice-president of the Ifouse of Deputies.
Art fele 90.—Whenecer a person who legally should substitute for the I'resi. dent Is lacking or suffers some accidental impediment, ids place shall be taken by the next person mentioned In the preceding article until the exercise of the executive function line been assumed by the person called to Oleo in accordance with lite provision of these!!! nrt tele.
Article 01.--Ito who, In conformity with the order and circumstances established in the three preceding articles, finally occupies the office of President of the Republic shall continue in office during the entire term for which the titular
President wits elected.	•
10, El Salvador: Constitution of Scplembcr 8, 1950
Article 64.-1f there in no I'resident of the Republic, due to death, resignation. remove!, or other cause, he shall be replaced by the Vice President; if the latter is unavailable, by one of the Designates in the order of their selection, and if all of these nro unavailable for any legal reason, the Assembly shall designate the person who Is to take office.
It the reason which incapacitates the President from exercising his position endures more than six months, the person replacing him, in accordance with tho terms of the preceding paragraph, shall complete the presidential term.
If the Incapacity of the President is temporary. Its replacement shall hold once while such Incapacity endures.
Article 65.--A citizen who occupied the Presidency of the Republic under any title may not be President, Vice President or Designate during the follow-lag presidential term.
II. 11a(11: Comlittition of Koecin bre 26,1950
Article 80.—If the President finds it temporarily impossible to perform his duties, the Council of Sect etaries of State Is charged with the executive authority for the duraticn of the impediment.
Article 81.--In ease of vacancy In the office of President of the Republic through death, resignation or for any other reason, the President of the Court of Cessation, or It. Ills default, the Vice President, or in default of the latter, the Senior Judge of the Court of Cessation, Is temporarily invested with the Executive Power.
He shall Immediately convoke the Primary Assemblies for the election of the President of the Republic, which must take place within four montho after the date of convocation.
Tho Provisional Chief of the Executive Power may not be a candidate for the Presidency before the Primary Assemblies which he has convoked, nor be elected by them.
It. ITonduras: Constitution of March 28,1936'
Article 114.—The executive power Is exercised by a citizen who Is called President of the Republic; in default thereof, by a Vice-President; and in default of the latter, by the citizen who occupies the presidency of the National
lionduras adopted a new constitution in December 1957,
228	Pit EllitllIONTIAL INABILITY
(7ongress or may have oceupled this position In the last ordinary legialatiire; and In &Null of the last, by the nit lien who is president of the Supreme Court of Justice.
•	•	•	•	•	•
Arlie/0 ffti.---In case of temporary disability of the President, he shall be substituted In his functions by the Vice-President; and in default of the latter, by the (singeing mentioned In Article 114.
If the deteult of the President be absolute, the Vice-President shall exercise the executive power for the remaining time of the period; but If the Vice-Pres!. dent also defaults absolutely, the one legally in substitution shall one month afterwards call an eleetion for n conetittittonel period that will begin the first of January following the convocation.
Article 110.--tholit the ono designated by law occupies the presidency, the executive power shad he exercised by the council of ministers; and it etnigrees be not In session, the council shalt immedIntel,. call in the now ofileint to give him pomeeslon.
Ls, tirooleo: cosAillittion of Jansary 41, 1917
Article S3.----Tho President shall enter upon his duties on the first day of Deeember and remain in office nix years. No citizen who has Retool as president, elected by popular vote, or appointed as substitute, or provisional president, or President ad feterim, can ever, In nuy event or for whatsoever reason, again occupy this post.
Article 84.—lo the event of the permanent disability of the President of the Republic, it this shall occur within the first two years of the respective term, Congress, If in roession shall forthwith net as an electoral college and with the attendance of a1 least two thirds of its total membership, shall choose a presh dent ad interim by secret ballot mod by a majority vote; and within the following ten days, the same Congress shall issue the call for elections for the president who shall flntsh the respective term. At least fourteen months and not more than eighteen months must elapse between the dote of the call for the elections and the date on which they are held.
Congress Is in recess,  the permanent committee shall forthwith designate n provisional president, and shall call Conform together In extraordinary session, at which a president ad Interim shall be appointed, and the call for presidential elections issued in the manner set forth in the foregoing paragraph.
Should the disability of the President occur in the met four years of the respective term, Congress, it in session, shall choose a substitute president to bold ofilce until the end of the presidential term ; if Congress is not in session, the permanent committee shell choose a prOvisloileil president and convene extraordinary sessions in order that it may net as an electoral college and proceed to the election of a substitute president.
Article 85.— • • • Incase of a temporary disability of the President Congress, or the permanent committee If Congress shall not be in session, shall designate an acting president during such disability.
In case the disability of the President exceeds thirty clays and Congress is not sitting, the permanent committee shall convene extraordinary sessions of Congress to take a decision in regard to his leave-of-absence and, In the respective case, the appointment of the President ad interim.
It a temporary disability shall become permanent, the acuon prescribed In the preceding article shall be taken.
1.1. Nicaragua: Constitution of Norember 1, 1950
Article 198.—In the event the President of the Republic is unable to serve, his functions shall be exercised by the appointed Designate. It the President has not appointed a Designate, or the latter is also unable to serve, the Presidency of the Republic shall be assumed by the President of the Congress, who shall immediately convoke an extraordinary session of Congress for the purpose of electing a successor from among its membership.
If at the time of a vacancy in the Presidency of the Republic, Congress Is meeting In regular or extraordinary session, the President of the Congress shall assume the Presidency of the Republic in order to turn over the once to the member whom Congress elects.
If the inability of the President to serve is permanent, the person called upon to replace him shall complete the presidential term.
Article/89.---In the event of a temporary or permanent inability to serve or an indefinite impediment of the President-elect, the new Congress shall elect among
PRIAIDWTIAL INABILITY	229
Its members the person who shall hold the office, temporarily or permanently as the citee may be.
15. Panama: COnatitution of March 1, 1946
Article 149.—In the temporary or permanent absence of the President of the
Republic, his duties will be performed by one of the Vice-Presidents in the order
In which they were elected.
•
Article 160.—When, for any reason, the absences of the President cannot be filled by the Vice-Presidents, one of the ministers of state, who Mille the rcqui-sitee necessary for being President of the Republic, and who has been elected therefor by majority vote, will All the prmideney,.
Arnett, 151.—When the permanent absence of the President and Vice-Presidents happens not less than two years before the expiration of the presidential period, the person charged with the duties of the presidency will call presidential and vice-presidential elections for a date not later than four months away, so that the citizen elected President may take possession within six months following the call. The respective decree will be issued at the. latest eight days after the aesumplion of the post by the mild person In charge. If It Is less than two years until the end of the term, the person In charge will perform his duties Until
the end of the said term.	•
Neither the citizen who has discharged the duties of the presidency within the two years immediately preceding the elections mentioned, nor any of his relatives within the fourth degree of consanguinity or second of affinity, may be elected President or Vice-President in these elections.
Article 152.—The citizen who replaces the President of the Republic will have the same title and rank and will exercise the same attributes as the tatter.
16. Paraguay: Constitution of July 10, 1940
Article 58.—In case of the resignation, Inability, nr death of the President of the Republic, the minister of the Interior will immediately convoke the Assem-My to appoint the minister or functionary who should exercise the presidency until the end of the term, unless the resignation, inability, or death occurs within the first two years of the presidential period, In which the circamstence the provisional President will convoke the people to elections within a period of two months. If the inability is temporary the National Assembly will appoint one of the ministers provisionally to exercise the presidency of the Republic.
17. Peru: Constitution of April 9, 1953 (at amended)
Article 144.—The presidency of the Republic Is vacated, besides in the case of
death:
(1) By permanent physical or moral incapacity of the President, declared by Congress.
(2) By the acceptance of his resignation.
•	•	•	•	•	•	•
Article 145.—The exercise of the presidency of the Republic is suspended:
•	•	•	•	•	•
(2) By the temporary physical Incapacity of the President declared by
Congress;
•	•	•	•	•	•	•
Article 147.—In the case of vacancy of the presidency of the Republic, Congress shall elect the President for the rest of the presidential period.
If, on the vacancy occurring, Congress is functioning, the election of the President shall be made within three days. If Congress is In recess, it must assemble' In extraordinary sessions for the sole object of electing the President and receiving his oath. The election, in this case, shall be made 'within twenty days counting from that on which the vacant'? occurred.
The convocation of Congress to assemble In extraordinary sessions to elect the President of the, Republic is effected by the President of the Senate, or, in default of the latter, by the president of the Chamber of Deputies.
Article 148.—The election of the President of the Republic by Congress shall be made by secret vote, in permanent and continuous session. The person obtaining an absolute majority of the votes shall be proclaimed.
22324-58-16
230	PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY
18. Uruguay: Constitution of October 26,1951
Article 158.—The ['residency of the National Council of Government shall be rotation, by yearly periods, among the members elected by the party which obtained a majority and by order of their place on the respective list.
In the event of the absence, vacancy or temporary impediment or leave of the Councillor serving RR President, he shall be replaced by the member who followed him on time said list, who shrill also occupy time Presideucy for the year corresponding to him by virtue of the above provisions.
In the case provided for in the last paragraph of Article 151. the Presidency shall be occupied by the members from the majority list In order of their position thereon, beginning with the one who received the most votes.
(9. Venezuela: Constitution of April 11,1953
Article 106.—in the event of the inability of the President of the Republic to serve after he has taken the oath of office, the Ministers of the Cabinet, With a quorum of one more than half, shall select by absolute majority vote a Minister to take charge of the National Executive Power. The Minister designated shall immediately take the oath of office before the Cabinet and shall time-tion as Acting in Charge of the National Executive Power. If the National Congress is in session it shall proceed, within ten days following the date of the vacancy, to elect a President of the Republic by an absoInte majority vote, for the remainder of the constitutional period. If the National Congress Is not in session, the Acting in Charge of the National Executive Power, within ten days after his designation, shall call an extraordinary session, for the purpose of tilling the vacancy. The National Congress shall meet within ten days after the call, and, within ten days following its installation shall proceed to elect, by absolute majority vote, a President of the Republic for the remainder of the constitutional period.
The President elected in the manner indicated shall take office within ten days after his election, taking the oath of office before the National Congress. or the Federal Court It the former is not in session. If he does not do so the office of President of the Republic shall be considered vacant and the procedure shall be followed that is provided In the foregoing article.
Article 107.—Temporary vacancies in the office of President of the Republic shall be tilled by a Minister of the National Executive Office designed by him. The designee shall act as Minister in Charge of the National Executive Power, after taking the oath of office before the President of the Republic or before the Federal Court. according to the decision of the President of the Republic upon making the designation.
DRE8MF.NITAL DISABILITY: CONSTITUTION OF THE CONFLDERATE STATES
or AVIERICA
The Constitution of the Confederate States of America, March 11, 1561, closely resembled the Constitution of the United States. The presidential disability, or Inability, clause was, in particular, practically identical, as may be seen from the following transcript from the Confederate Constitution:
"ARTICLE II, PARAGRAPH 8
"In case of the removal of the President from office, or of his demo, resignation, or inability to discharge the powers and duties of the said office, the same shall devolve on the Vice-President; and the Congress may, by law, provide for the case of the removal, death, resignation, or inability both of the President and the Vice-President, declaring what officer shall then act as President, and such officer shall then act accordingly until the disability be removed or a President shall be elected."
Senator KEFAIIVER. We will ask the staff of the subcommittee to have the hearings printed as quickly as possible. Any other statements that are received in the next few days will be included in the record.
Commager, Henry Reeler. editor : Documents of American History. New York, Appleton-Century-Crofts, Iva, 1848. p. 881.
PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY	231'
With that our hearings will be terminated and the subcommittee will try to make a decision about this matter.
Mr. Rhyne, we again want to express our very deep appreciation to you for the public service you have rendered in giving us your thinking about this matter and coming here this morning.
Mr. RHYNE. Thank you, Senator. I again thank you for your courtesy and kindness in hearing me.
Senator KErAuvEll. We stand in recess.
(Whereupon at 11:26 a. m., the hearings were concluded.) (Subsequently, the subcommittee received the following communications:)
Hon. ESTES KEFAUTEB,
United Slates Senate,
Washington, D. C.
DEAR SENATOR KEFAUVER: In reply to your telegram asking my views on the problem of Presidential inability, I submit the following:
1. If Congress does nothing I shall not feel that the Republic is imperiled. I held this opinion before President Eisenhower's recent announcement to his press conference.
2. I think it might be worth while for Congress to consider passing a concurrent resolution along the following lines:
(a) The Congress welcomes the statement of President Eisenhower that Vice President Nixon "knows what he should do in the event of a Presidential disability" that is serious, and trusts that there will be similarly clear understandings between future Presidents and Vice Presidents.
(b) The Congress expects that in the event of serious Presidential inability the Cabinet, the majority and minority leaders of Congress, and the Vice President wilt take counsel with each other and will announce to the Congress the -decisions that they reach. (I put the Vice President last in this enumeration because while he has the right to act as President in the event of Presidential inability, it Is not for him alone to judge whether he should exercise the right. Ile should act as President only after advice taken from the Cabinet and with the approval of the Congress.]
(o) The Congress expects to be informed from time to time on the continuance or lessening of the President's inability and on the occasion of his re-assumption of his duties.
3. I view a constitutional amendment as (a) completely unnecessary and (b) possibly harmful.
(a) Unnecessary.—I have a feeling that those who desire an amendment are taking an "apprehensive" view of the Constitution. I borrow the word from my former colleague, the famous international lawyer, John Bassett Moore. He described the "apprehensive" method of interpretation as "fertile in doubts" and as treating "powers as subjects of abuse rather than as national necessities for sources of advantage." He was dealing with the treatymaking clauses, and apprehensions concerning them resulted in the proposal of the Bricker amendment. I think that Judge Moore's view is equally applicable to article II, section 1, paragraph 6: "in case of the removal of the President from office," and so forth. Moreover, we should not forget what Edmund Burke said in his famous speech on conciliation with the American Colonies: "In other courtries the people more simple and of a less mercurial cast, judge an ill principle in government only by an actual grievance; here they anticipate the evil." The Americans, he went on to say, "augur misgovernment at a distance; and snuff the approach of tyranny in every tainted breeze."
I do not think we need fear that any Vice President taking over Presidential "powers and duties until • • • the inability of the President be removed" would insist on retaining those powers when the President had made a recovery. Which Vice President that this country has had (or which unsuccessful vice-presidential candidate) could be suspected of being capable of harboring such a design? It is alleged that our national nominating conventions sometimes nominate candidates for the Vice Presidency with insufficient thought as to
COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY IN TINE CITY OF NEW YORK, DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC LAW AND GOVERNMENT,
New York, N. Y., March 2, 1958.
282	PRESIDI:NTIAL INABILITY
Whether they would make good Presidents. I do not tear that they might nominate candidates who would seek to be men on horseback.
(b) Harmful.—Even though a constitutional amendment were carefully drafted, some specific provisions might well ho inappropriate in the event of a situation that the draftsmen had not contemplated. Then there would have to be nn endeavor to follow the matulate of the amendment rather than to do the wire and sensible thing. The more detailed the nmentIment, the more em-harm:using some provision might be. 'Dike, for example, the proposal of a de-eisbi reached by it majority of the Cabinet. The 4 Cabinet members in the minority might command far more confidence front the country thAn the 6 who happened to be in the majority.
NVhatever the merit or demerit of these views,' I have held them without change for a good many years. In 1020, I wrote for the Review nu article entitled, "Presidential Inability," of which I enclose a copy, and which you may wish to Include in the hearings. It discusses some details of President Wilson's inablillY That I have not seen in print elsewhere; the dates on which bills became law without his signature, and the duties on which he was able to sign bills.
I concluded this article by saying that perhaps Congress would be wise to pass a bill along the hues suggested above. Since there has been discussion of a possible veto, I now suggest n concurrent resoletion. To be sure, this would be hortatory rather then mandatory, but 1 think that the expresslon of congressional desires and expectations would be just as effective as the olet. meat of a statute.
With high regard, I tun,
Yours faithfully,
LINDSAY ROGERS, Moves* Professor of Public Late.
(Front the Iteliew, Mny R, 19201
PRIFAIDENTIAL INAHILITY
(Mr. Wilson's improved health has removed from the problem of the dis- ability of a President to perfortwthe duties of his office any pressure of present, urgency. lint the experience of the half year during which his illness was serious serves as ample reason for discussing this important and delicate question on its merits)
Several proposals have been made in Congress to decide how' the fact of Presidential inability to act may be determined, and if the Rouse Judiciary Committee can agree, It will doubtless make some recommendation. f Hue the chances of early action are not great, since the questions of constitutional law awl political policy are difficult and important and, judging from the attitude of Congress hitherto, a decision will be long delayed. Not until 1886 did Congress amend the Presidential succession law of 1702, which was, admittedly, inadequate and, perhaps, unconstitutional. Hut the question should be answered: It the President is uneble to act, who is to determine how administrative decisions are to be made and other public business proceeded with, in order that the Government may not suffer a collapse similar to that of recent months which culminated in Secretary Lansing's resignation?
The framers of the Constitution attempted to guard against an interregnum by providing that "In the case of the removal of the President from office, or his death, resignation, or inability to discharge the powers and duties of the said office, the same shall devolve on the Vice President, and the Congress may by law provide for the case of removal, death, resignation, or inability, both of the President and Vice President, declaring what. officer shall then act as President, and such officer shall act accordingly until the disability be removed or a President shall be elected."
This provision, although in ambiguous terms, at least considers every possibility except the death of the President or Vice President subsequent to election but prior to inauguration. That contingency, fortunately, has never confronted the country, but Congress his not attempted to take measures to deal with it. In five cases, owing to death, the Vice President has become Chief Magistrate: Tyler, Filmore, Johnson, Arthur, and Roosevelt. Johnson was threatened with removal, but no President has ever suggested resignation, and the mention of this method of vacating the office is the only joke in the Federal Constitution.
PRESIDENTIAI. INABILITY	233
The act of March 1, 1702, provided that the President of the Senate pro tempore and the Speaker of the House of Representntives should follow the Vice President
in succession to the Presidency. nere were, however, a number of objections to this arrangement. Its constitutionality was open to question, since it was not certain that the Speaker and President pro temporo were officers of the United States within the meaning of the term as used in the Constitution. In the second place—and Mullion was among those who pointed this out—if one of these congressional officials went to the White House, there was no requirement that he give up his original duties, and his executive and legislative functions alight conflict. Third, between Congresses there is no Speaker of the Howie, and until 1800 the President of the Senate pro lempore (11(1 not hold over; consequently, if the President and Vice President should (Ile during this !Merlin, difficulties would ensue.
There were a number of attempts to change the law. In 1820, the Senate Judiciary Committee was ordered to report whether any changes were necessary. It replied itimninunuily that at that limo It was inexpedient to legislate. In 18.0, the Committee ou the Judiciary reported tint the act was constitutional, but suggested (lint, If there should lx, a vacancy in the Mikes of Speaker and President of the Senate pro tenipore, the Chief Justice of the United States (provided he had not presided nt an impeachment) and then the Associate Justices of the Supreme Court of the United Slates should succeed according to seniority. No action was taken by the Semite on this report, and the matter was not pressed until 1881.
Refuse Congress met in December of that year and before either the Speaker of the House or the President pro tempore of the Senate had been chosen, Garfield died. The fact tint for some time he was unable to perform the duties of his office calms' the question of inability to be discussed, and when, in 1885, during Cleveland's administration, Vice President Hendricks died, some legislative action was felt to be necessary. In both cases, if the incumbents of the Presidential office—Presidents Arthur and Cleveland—had died during the congressional rivesses, there would have been no one to take their places. More than that, it was possible for the office to go to n member of the political party which had been defeated in the election, for, during Cleveland's term, Senators Sherman and Ingnils were Presidents pro tempore of the Senate and were Republicans.
. On January 19, 1880, therefore, Congress passed a law providing that, if the constitutional provision were invoked, sumession to the Presidency should vest in the Vice President, the Secretary of Slate, the Secretary of the Treasury, the Secretary of War, the Attorney General, the Postmaster General, the Secretary of the Navy, and the Secretary of the Interior, In the order named. The act also declared "That, whenever the powers and duties of the office of President of the United States shall devolve upon any of the persons named herein, if Congress be not then in session, or if It would not meet in accordance with the law within twenty days thereafter, it shall be the duty of the person upon whom such powers and duties shall devolve to Issue a proclamation convening Congress in extraordinary session, giving twenty days' notice of the lime of meeting."
This statute, however, does not attempt to settle two important points. In the first place, It seems to be agreed that Congress has the power to order a special election to fill a vacancy. The act of 17tr2 provided that an election should be held, but the question was left open in the net of 1886. Senator Hoar offered an amendment giving the person who succeeded to the Presidency the right to serve until the expiration of the regular term, but this was defeated, and Congress apparently reserves the right to order an election, if it deems wise. If a President were chosen under an intermediate election, his term would be 4 years, and that would destroy the present synchrony between the executive and legislative branches. It is possible, moreover, to imagine eases of conflict between the executive and legislative when Congress would use this method for getting rid of a President to whom It objected, and an Acting ['resident could veto a measure providing for a special election. On the other hand, the Constitution unquestionably contemplated that only persons chosen by the electoral college should serve as Presidents. Fortunately, however, the succession has never gone further than the Vice President, and the difficulties which undeniably exist need not be solved until they confront us.
The second and more serious question is the meaning of "inability," and here the writers are in almost complete disagreement. Prof. W. W. Willoughby, the heading authority on American constitutional law, simply states the problem, and does not attempt to answer it:
234	PRFSJIDENTIAL INABILITY
"In the absence of a definition, who is to determine, and what conditions are to be held to create, an Inability on the part of the President to perform hisduties? What is to bo done in case the President is temporarily disabled by sickness, or accident, or insanity? Who Is to decide, and by what criteria, when this disablement Is so serious and so prolonged as to require the appoint-tnent of an Acting President ?"
The most elaborate discussit a of these questions It; to le found In the North American Review for November l8S1. Four distinguished constitutional authorities contributed to an interesting symposium on Presidential inability, apropos of the illness of President Garfield. The President's; death rendered unnecessary any decision in his ense, but the various possibilities were fully considered and widely differing opinions were expressed.
Senator Trumbull took the position that as no proof was required when the President died, "so in the ease of inability the fact must be so notorious that there can be no reasonable doubt about it, nor that an urgency exists requiring Immediate notion on important matters, before the Vice President would be warranted In assuming the duffles of the President. When such a ease arises, the people will not only acquiesce in the discharge of the Presidential duties by the Vice President, but will denim! that he exercise them."
Senator Trumbull questioned whether any law could be passed improving this situation. Ours is n people's government, lie argued, and peaceful succession to the highest office must depend upon the support of public opinion. This support Is both necessary and sufficient in eases of Inability as well as In cases of election.
Judge Cooley, the eminent writer on constitutional law, urged that the (us-Bon of inability was one for Congress to determine. "It is possible," he said, "for a case to arise so plain, so unmistakably determined in the public judgment, that public opinion, with unnnhnous concurrence, would summon the Vice President to act. But though this would make him Acting President de facto, he would become Acting President de jure only after solemn recognition in some form by Congress." Such recognition. It may be said. has niwnys been given, even If only in the form of a communication telling the new incumbent of the Presidency that Congress has organized and Is waiting for his message. And Judge Cooley argued that since Congress has the power to embarrass and to tie the hands of the Vice President, Congress Is competent to declare when the inability exists.
The third contributor to this symposium was Benjamin F. Butler, who thought that the question of inability was a judicial one on which Congress could not pass. He took it to be "axiomatic that when the Constitution imposes a duty on any officer, to be done by him, he must be the sole judge when and how to do that duty, subject only to his responsibility to the people and to the risk of impeachment if he net improperly or corruptly," and if in certain cases the discharge of the duties of the President devolves upon the Vice President, "he alone must judge, under the grave responsibility of his position, when his duties begin, as he must determine how and in what manner he will exercise them."
Professor Dwight, on the other hand, took the view that public opinion would not be able to restrain an ambitious man eager to occupy the Presidential seat. He suggested that "some proper legal proceeding might be instituted by Con-grmr, In which the evidence required by law might be presented under the general power to carry into execution all powers vested by the Constitution In any department or officer of the Government."
It is evident that these views do not disclose any agreement as to what constitutes and who determines Presidential inability. Certain opinions expressed by these writers, however, may be accepted. The support of public opinion is necessary if anyone Is to succeed to the Presidential office; the responsibility of the Vice President is heavy; Congress must approve, or a dangerous instance of disunion between the executive and legislative branches might occur. The Constitution unquestionably contemplated temporary inability, and it can be provided for without submitting an amendment to the States. The Vice President and the Cabinet, with the support of Congress, are competent to determine the matter.
President Wilson ought to be rather reluctant to criticize any efforts which were made during his illness to prevent complete governmental inaction. Certainly the disposition of everyone—Congress, the Vice President, the Cabinet, and the public—was against raising the question of how the Inability should be met. That it existed was sure. To mention only I evidence, 28 bills became law during the special session of Congress owing to the failure of the Exeeu-
PRESIDENTIAL INABILITY	235
tive to act within 10 days (exclusive of Sundays) after their receipt at the White House; and when full disclosures aro made as to the nature and times of the President's complete inability to act, It will be Interesting to check them up with the dates on which bills were signed. For example, the President was able to veto the Prohibition Enforcement Act on October 27, but he did not approve 2 statutes which became law on October 22 and 25, and he failed to sign Public Laws Nos. 07 to 82, inclusive (October 28 to November 18), with the exception of No. 73, the first general deficiency law for 1920, which was signed on November 4. After November 18 practically all of the bills became law with the signature of the President.
The Vice President, supported by Congress, could, under these cirewnstances, I think, have asserted the right to act for the period of the emergency. But the Vice President is an anomalous officer of the United States, who presides over the Senate while he waits for the President to die. Although by the Constitution he succeeds to the Presidency, he is, in most cases, totally unfamiliar with flIv problems of the administration. In spite of tho fact that, for long periods, Mr. Wilson's Cabinet was Ignored, this body was the best qualified to deal with the problems that needed consideration. A wise President might have asked Secretary Lansing to call bis colleagues together, and I cannot see that the informal Cabinet meetings constituted a dangerous precedent. The President, perhaps, does not know that they were the only evidence to the public that there wee any Government in Washington, and they may have saved Mr. Wilson the embarrassment of having the question of inability brought to a settlement by Congress or by the 'Vice President, in response to public opinion.
What seems to be required in the future is a simple statute saying that it the President is temporarily unable to act he shall notify the Vice President and request him to consult with the Cabinet—as was done during Mr. Wilson's absence abroad; and that if the fact of the President's inability is notorious, and yet this fiction is not taken by him, the Vice President shall meet with the Cabinet, informing Congress of the situation, or calling it into special session, if this Is necessary. The Supreme Court of the United States c ,ald not be compelled to pass on the question without n constitutional amendment enlarging its jurisdiction, and in any event It would be a political matter similar to those which the Court has hitherto wisely avoided taking any part in.
It is true that such a statute as the one suggested might encourage an ambitious Vice President to attempt to Interpret a temporary indisposition as constitutional Inability, but the fear of Congress and of public opinion would, I think, be an effective bar. And, after all, it would simply be one more of those political arrangements which for their success depend on that "natural sentiment" which the historian Grote called "constitutional morality": "a per. feet confidence in the bosom of every citizen, amidst the bitterness of party contest, that the forms of the Constitution will be no less sacred in the eyes of his opponents than in his own."
LANDSAT ROGERS.
THE UNIVMAITY OF CHLOA00,
Tat LAw Seneca,
Chicago, Iii., March 3, 1958.
Hon. Bates ICsn'Auvee,
Chairman of Subcommittee on Constitutional Amendments,
United Stales Senate, Washington, D. C.
DEAR SENATOR KEVAVVER: In response to your telegram of February 27, I have nothing to add to the views on the subject of Presidential disability, which I expressed to the special subcommittee of the House on that subject, headed by Hon. Emanuel Celler, of New York, about 2 years ago. (See hearings before Special Subcommittee to Study Presidential Disability of the Committee on the Judiciary, House of Representatives, 84th Cong., 2d sess., April 11 and 12, 1950, serial No. 20, pp. 105-110.)
However, at the request of one of the newspapers here, I boiled down my views on the most important aspect of this subject, last year, for publication in their columns. I enclose a copy of the result, which is shorter and probably for that reason clearer than what I had to say before the House committee. I hope it may be of some use to you.
Sincerely yours,
WILL/A1.1 W. CROBSKET.
236
PRESIDENTIAL INA III WY
il•'roo- tile Chicago Daily News, April 10, 10571
Pnorration CROSRKEY:PEr.SIDENTIALDIMARILITY A JUDICIAL. Issue
I cannot agree that Congress has all along had power, under the Presidential-disability provisions of the Constitution, to deal fully—had it only desired to so—with the three eases of Presidential disability that have thus far arisen.
The provisions in question actually give Congress no power at all In cases merely of Presidential disability, death, resignation, or removal from office,
The power given is limited expressly to "the ease of removal, death, resignation, or innbility, both of the President and Vim President"; and in such a case, Congress can do no more than "provide," or "declare," "by law," "what officer shall then act RR President." It cannot determine ntuhorltntively that n case of such dual disability has arisen.
It is also not trne, as seine have supposed, that Congress can deal fully with Presidential-disability cases, by virtue of the power it has under the "necessary and proper" clause.
This clause empowers the Congress only to "make laws."
L'residentiat•dlsability enses do not call for the making of laws; they call, whenever there is any doubt or difference about the matter, for the finding of n fact-the fact of Presidential disability—and they call, further, for the application of preexisting law to that fact—law already provided in the Constitution.
Upon any accurate view, what is called for Is adjudication; not legislation, or the making of laws.
The widespread belief that the Constitution does not provide for determining such eases is a consequence, I think, of reading the L'residential•disability provisions out of context.
In addition, there were certain transactions of the Federal Convention, on and atter August 27, 1787, which are mistakenly taken to confirm this widespread view.
On that date, the Presidential-disability provisions in the draft cons.itution of August 0 came before the Convention. Various members objected to these.
John Dickinson of I;elaware complained because no "judge" of Presidential disability was designated. On this ground and others, the provisions were postponed.
Four days inter, they were handed to a committee for revision. John Dickinson was a member of this committee. Yet, when the committee reported, it recommended Presidential-disability provisions containing no indication us to who was to be "the judge" in such eases.
So, if the usual view is correct, the Convention not only mode no provisions upon this subject; it must also have intended to make none.
This is, for me, a hard conclusion to reach; and it is easy to show that it is not cermet.
When John Dickinson made his complaint on August 27, there was, indeed, no provision in the Constitution upon the subject about which he complained; the judiciary provisions of the document were then very narrow.
Later, on the same day, the judiciary provisions were, however, much extended, and one of the extensions met Dickinson's complaint completely.
This was the provision whereby the judicial power was extended to "all cases in law and equity arising under the Constitution."
Cases "arise under the Constitution'. whenever they present a question as to the meaning or application of any of its provisions. Presidenial-disability cases would fall within this category.
A case is, furthermore, a case in law or equity, within the meaning of the above provision whenever it is a case of a kind customarily litigated in courts either of law or equity at the time when the Constitution was drawn.
Among the cases then long customarily litigated in courts of taw were cases of "quo warranter." In such cases the right of an individual might be adjudicated to exercise the powers and duties (but not necessarily to enjoy the salary and perquisites) of a public office.
Presidential-disability cases would be such cases. So would cases arising under the same constitutional provision that presented any question of the removal of a Presidential disability.
Both therefore would be within the constitutional authority of the national courts to decide: A conclusion in perfect accord with the general scheme of tripartite division of governmental power under the document. For the cases in question are cases calling for adjudication, and the Constitution puts them where such cases are generally put.
P011511.W.ZiTIAI. INABILIT1'	237
The Supremo Court has held that, in the absence of contrary legislation by Congress, the right of initiating proceedings in quo warrant°, as to offices under the United States, belongs exclusively to too Attorney General. Congress, however, can mold this remedy in practically any way It sees fit.
Thus, It could, and probably should, give an initiatory right in all Presidential disability cases to the Vice President; and to the President, in removabof-disability cases.
It could, also, It it saw fit, confer initiatory rights, In both these cases, upon any citizen; or it could, I think, provide for such rights in Congres itself, as a group of interested citizens; or, in order to assure the right of initiation to both political parties, it could give such rights to a congressional minority, preferably one not too large.
And, finally, it Congress saw tit to do so, it could put such rights into a special standing commission of distinguished citizens. The right to counsel, other than the Attorney General, could also be provided.
WILLIAM W. CEOSSKLY, Professor of Law, University of Chicago.
UNIVERSITY OP ILLINOIS,
DEPARTMENT OF POLITICAL SCIENCE, Urbana, DS., March 4, 1958. HOD. ESTES REFAUVER,
Scnoto Office Building, Washington, D. C.
DEAR SENATOR RETAUVER ; I apologize for not answering your January letter, but I have been away from my office for the last 0 months on a research leave. I have little to add to my letter to Representative 0eller (January 5, 1050) for the Special Subcommittee on Study of Presidential Inability of the HOURS Committee on the Judiciary. However, the intervening public and congressional discussion further convinces 1310 that a constitutional amendment is desirable..
As the Constitution stands .a plausible argument can be made that the authority to determine the fact of Presidential inability is vested in (1) the Congress, (2) the President, (3) the Vice President, (4) the courts. In my Judgment the most pressing need la to determine beyond any doubt where the responsibility lies. Hence, I favor a simple amendment stating in effect: "The Congress may by law provide for the case of the inability of the President."
I believe that such an amer.dment is preferable to one that would itself stipulate the procedures to be used. It would allow Congress to change or modify the procedures according to future experiences.
Of course, implementing legislation would be needed. Since the existence of "Inability," its duration, and the question of whether the Vice ('resident should become President or merely Acting President are "political" (but not partisan) questions, I favor vesting this Judgment in the Congress which is accountable to the electorate. I think past history indicates the unwisdom of placing the duty on the Vice President. But, in my Judgment, the resolution of the doubts about who determines which procedures shall be used is more important than the question of which particular method should be adopted. I would, by amendment, leave up to the wisdom of Congress the decision as to how inability shall be established.
Sincerely yours,
JACK W. PELIVI SON.
COLONNADE CLUB,
UNIVERSITY OP VIRGINIA,
Charlottesville, Va., March 5, 1958.
Senator 8sTes REFAUTEB,
Chairman, Standing Subcommittee on Constitutional Amendments, Committee on the Judiciary, United States Senate,
Washington, D. O.
DEAR SarvAros K s.uvza: I received your letter of January 10 last and your telegram of a few days ago, and I tender my apologies for replying so tardily. If this letter is not too late, it may be included in the record.
I answered the questionnaire of Representative Geller for the subcommittee of the House Committee on the Judiciary and later testified before that subcommittee. I shall not repeat here what I then submitted, for it was published at the time.
238	PitEstirENTIAL INABILITY
:try present inelinstion in to submit to you some conelusions an of today.
The subject is highly important, but nay solution which has been nottitb, Including my own, has serious objections. This is probably why it has been so hard to agree.
one Is tempted, after nil the discussion, to say, "Let ns not fix any solution in advance, but leave any actual situation which may arise to be handled when It arises."
Rut doing nothing in advance has the serious danger that, in an emergency. delay may he caused by uncertainty, with disastrous results.
I view with alarm freezing a solution into a constitutions' amendment. because the solution chosen tnny not work Weil and yet could be changed only by another amendment.
I see only one argument which Is worthy of being taken seriously agninst Congress having the power to net in this matter under the "necessary and proper" clause. That objection is that this delicate subject touches the huh-Pendrileo of the Presidency, a matter (lost: to the hearts of the bulk of the framers mud of the utmost hoportance in our system as it has developed.
Despite this argument, a strong cage can be made for the power of Congress to implement the constitutional provision under the "necessary mid proper" clause.
Our first neutrality act, approved June 5, 1701, changed the enacting clause in all pertinent sections to "lie it enacted and declared, etc." I take this to mean that Congress did not want to be pinned down to the assertion that what it provided was a new enactment or was merely declaratory of the taw of nn-ttons and in part of the command power of the President. Perhaps Congress might now follow the resourcefulness of the men of that day and "enact and declare" that, In case of a Presidential inability, the Vice President is to become Acting President, and that he is to cease to be such when the disability is removed. It might then "enact" how and by whom both these things should be determined.
Aye; there's the rub. For, here, men differ on legal points and on policy. There are those who think the determination of inability belongs to the Vice President, and, certainly, if he is faced with a situation when the decision must be made, he would have the responsibility of stepping In.
In this connection, I approve the Eisenhower•Nixon agreement, and consider it a valid and useful step. Its only weakness is In not providing for the possible case where the President thinks and determines that the disability has been removed but Is still not in shape to carry on his office.
I see no merit whatever in the criticisms of Speaker Rayburn and ex-President Truman. I see no reason why an Acting President could not take the oath that he will faithfully exercise the office of President. Indeed. the Constitution says that the Senate shall choose a President pro tempore in the absence of the Vice President or when he shall exercise the office of President. which he can do In an acting capacity. The President and Vice President have not created the office of Acting President, but have merely given a name to what they interpret the Constitution as providing for In the event of inability.
There Is the objection of policy to the Vice President's having the decision, however, that be is the party in interest, and, hence, would not decide without criticism or embarrassment. It would be bad for him to push himself Into the office. It would also be bad for him to hesitate to act when action was needed because be was leaning over backward to avoid the charge of usurpation.
To the Celler subcommittee I first proposed that Congress provide that the Supreme Court appoint as inferior officers private citizens of distinction to be prepared to serve when an occasion arose as commissioners to make both determinations.
I later modified this to make them private citizens in active life, to get around the criticism that, between the time the men were appointed and the time a case arose, they might become feebleminded and yet still be commissloners.
My purpose was to get men whose judgment and honesty the public would respect, men who would make their decision in a quasi-judicial spirit. I as-
sumed that Supreme Court members should not sit as commissioners themselves.
bat that they might be given, by law, the power to appoint as technically inferior officers, as per the constitutional provision, men of high standing from
active public life, and that these men would serve as commissioners ea long as they were engaged in active life and were not removed by the Supreme Court for cause.
E.SIDENTIAL INABILITY	239
The Cabinet is comix)sesi of ndminIstrative subordinates of the President whose respect for and dependence for their offices upon him might make them
tel	Ir> act.
Congress; is a political body, and I look with disfavor upon the suggestion that it be empowered to decide a matter so closely retnted to the tenure of the President. Impeachment by the House and removal after conviction by the Senate was nhuost slimmed in reconstruction in a manner which might have permanently weakened the Presidency. Fortunately, the Impeachment process has not since been a serious threat to Presidential independence. But so vital do I regard such independence to our system that I object to having this power given to Congress by law or by constitutional amendment.
I said at the beginning that every solution has its drawbacks, Including my own. Yet I woke one more plea for serious considers tiou of some form of my proposal to the Celler committee. The objection that I want to set up w. o. e.'s I regard as misleading.
I am not inclined to have the President notify the Vice President where that is pomible, as per the Eisenhower-Nixon agreement. But, where that is not possible, why not have distinguished citizens chosen by the Supreme Court standing by as commissioners for the purpose of deciding, with the proviso that they retire as commissioners* when they retire from active private life, as suitably defined? And, since the resumption of activity by the President is an even more delicate ;natter, why not have these men decide that in all cases?
I am honored to be asked to comment upon this Important subject. It you should wish me to amplify or clarity my summary statements, please let me know.
Respectfully yours,
'AWES HART.
AMERICAN COLLLOE OF CHEST PHYSICIANS, Chicago, Ill., March 6, 1958. Hon. ESTES KEFAUVER,
Senate Office Building, Washington, D. C.
DEAR Hut; An important Issue of current concern to the Congress is the need for legislation regarding procedure to protect the interests of the country in the event the President should be unable to carry on the duties of his office. A proposed bill now before Congress suggests the establishment of a 7-man Commission on Presidential Disability. These 7 men, under,the proposed bill, would be the Secretary of State, the Speaker of the House, the President pro temp ore of the Senate, and the 4 party leaders of the 2 Houses.
Insofar as this can go, it appears to be a reasonable and effective proposal; however, the one, and perhaps most important issue it does not seem to cep-shier, is just what qualified person or persons will determine the ['resident's state of health.
It appears to me that this Is a medical rather than a legislative problem and that the most difficult decision facing the Congress would be to determine when the Chief Executive is physically or mentally incapable of carrying out his duties as President.
if this premise is accepted as a basis for legislation, we would accordingly propose that the Congress establish a medical commission comprised of 3 physicians: 1 to be selected by the Democratic leaders, a second by the Republican leaders, and the third to be designated by these 2 parties. Recognized medical societies can be requested to submit a suggested panel of prominent physicians from which the Congress could make its select ion.
We further recommend that this medical commission be comprised of a cardiologist, a specialist in pulmonary disease, and a neurologist, since it would appear that disability, were it to occur, would fail within these 3 specialties. The duty of this medical commission would be to consult with the President's personal physician and periodically check the President's health. If. in the opinion of these specialists, the President's health is such that he should not carry the heavy burden of the office of President, they could so advise the President -.nd make proper recommendations. Should the President he incapacitated and unable to make a decision on his own, the duty of the medical commission would then be to report their findings to the 7-man Commission on Presidential Disability. The Congress would then be obliged to take the necessary steps to declare the President incapable of carrying on the official duties and to elect the Vice President to succeed him.
240	PitI:Min.:N.11AI, IN.11III,ITY
Mime President Eisenhower has requested that the Congress enact legisIntion
In operation for Pildt eventualities. I (rust that the foregoing plan will merit
consideration by yonr omunitlee.
ltembeetfully yours,
MURRAY NORNitt.n, Exceutiue Ilfrevior.
11*Ami1lATO7ON 11NIVERRITY,
DreAltiliENT or l'otAlIcAl. HulEtrur,
$1. total?, .1, a., March 6, 1938.
&gutter Esyss lirrAtit ra,
Collett Slates Seattle.
IrlsAs 8rs viva KErsevvit : Posed 01 your splendid record In the Senate, your assoelation with the disability 'intendment was what yonr followers might have expected, But, 1, nevertheless, congratulate you on (MK new basic service to the nubile.
Pot tuulty ;Ming it titiniont of our eomditutional system and constilutionol law, I am certain that only by amending the Constitution enn nn utiequale and stable clarineation of the provision concerning the disability of the President be achieved, There are obvious objections to n mere eompaet between the President and the Vice President. Mel a statute based upon article II. section I, tAragroplt i1, aml the necessary and limper clause of the 00111411tn11011 would always tie an unity target for challenges of its tsillimt I Itt 1011111 I ty.
Your draft of an tinitittilliellt seems to toe the best dolt hap 1)01 offered MIR far. flat some additional provisions seem to me desirable, if not imperative.
Yours (rely,
Alison) J. LIEN.
t. 11. am one among the many who would like to have ns n first section n declaration to the eiTeet that In the case of It N•nenney in the Wilco of President. the Vice President shall beeome President and serve as such for the remainder of the unespired term.
2. Ilecanks 8 tunes In our history the office of Vice President has had a va•
candy	(tines because the Vier President became President and once becaugo
the Vice President resigned), on additional section would seem to be absolutely ewittial, with the following suggested content : "In (we of n vacancy In the aka of Vice President, the functions, powers, and duties vested by this article in the Vice President shall he perforated by the officer designated by the Congress by law as next in line to act as President Under the conditions specified in this Constitution. And the t.'ongresa shall by law adapt the procedure herein prescribed for use in the case of the disability of the President to the case of the simultaneous disability of both the President And the Vice President."
In this age serious consideration has to :le given hot only to the high death rate among the incumbents of the ofttee of President with its terrille strains and preatres, but also to the hosards of travel by air and to the ever-present threat of atomic warfare.
NEW YORK, N. V., March 13, 1958.
Hon. Esyss KErAtcER,
Unitcd States Igcnale, Washtngtott, 1). C.
Drat Sassiest harsuvsa: You have been good enough to suggest that I send to you, as chairman of the Standing Subcommittee on Constitutional Amendments of the Committee on the Judiciary of the Senate, my views on the question of presidential succession.
1. The principal purpc*e of many of the current proposals on presidential dis• ability is to make clear that the Vice President succeeds only to the powers and duties and not to the omee in the event of a presidential disability.
It Is desirable that this point be clear. It necessary we should have a constitutional amendment to make it clear. But I suggest that the history of article 2, section 1, clause 6, in fact makes it clear that it is only to the powers and duties to which the Vice President would suttee' in the event of the disability of the President.
The draft Constitution, before it went to the Committee oh Stylei provided that, daring periods of inability or vacancy In the Presidency, "the Vice President shall exercise those powers and duties until another President be chosen, or
!'1tl'Ri1-VN'1'IA1, I NABfbil'Y	241
until the !nubility of the President be removed." no Coinfoittee on Style sub-
si	ed "the Smile" for "powers and duties," and "devolve" for "exercise." The
Committee on Style had uo authority to make nay substantive changes and It follows that It could not have been the intention of the Committee to change the lollftle provision fie drafted by the Convention, namely, that It was only to the powers find duties to which the Vice President wine I aucceed.
If we were dealing with an net of Congresa and not a conslitutionnt provision
would agree that it would be well to clarify the nuttier once nrid for fill, Hut I do believe that we Omuta he diary with conatIllItIOWII amendment/I and should propose them only when there is line clearest kind of need. I suggest that this clear need does not exist In this crime.
The viewe of President Elsenlirat or, Vice Presideet Nixtei, find the attorney tleneral opine Fondly are in accordance with what I trove Just said. There nro ethers whin disagree. No It fulghl be well to have n concurrent resolution of the Cougresm which would express tlie interpreInflon of the Congrusa on the muldect. I wombd think the chances high that after the debate which would hike piner on the their of the House, the result wnnhl be to lin ve ri coneirrrP8I
Una expres,+Inig the npielon of the emigres/4 along the line. 1 haVeJlist suggested; and if ibis were so I should think that would cslni,llsPr nn effective interpretation of the Coustitutioe. If this Is wrong and the opinion or the UMW of liege resneninfivem arid Rennie were to the contrary, or even Indeed If there were a largo minority view to the contrary, then the umiter of the censtitutionnl (intend. tricot might be taken op.
9. if the foregoing view were neceptcsi, It would seem to fellow that DO con. Alltutionni ninendinent would he necessary to provide for the recapture by the Prommoot or the powers find &files In the event of his recovery from the dim-
This point is covered by Ihe presetit provisions of article 2, section clause a
S. Then there Is the filleftti011 us to tine consultations which the Vice President should !mike in the ease of a 1111labled President who will not or cannot declare his inability. r do not think it ne(vicsary or desirable to elaborate the kind of conaultation or authority which the Vim President should have In order to mite thin determination. Obviously he should consult with many people In rind out of tinvernment, and I doubt the wie.dom of specifying in detail whom lie should consult. If It is specIlbsi that be must consult with the Cabinet thla would seem to exclude hit responsibility to consult with others, as for example leaders in both parties and even tnedIval authorities. I think we must have confidence that omelets in much high position's will act with responsibility in a matter of such great national importance.
Respectfully yours,
THOMAS K. FIN:ATTU&
(8. J. !Its. 8, 84th Cong., 1st segvj
JOINT Illi801,CTION To *meal the constitution to authorise governors to MI temporary vaeandes In the !louse of 'Representatives
Rewired by the Senate and house of Representatives of the United Stales of America fit Congress assembled (twathirds of each HOIlde concurring therein), That the following article is proposed as an amendment to the Constitution of the United States, and shall be valid to all intents and purposes as part of the Constitution only If ratified by the legislatures of three-fourths of the several States within seven years from the date of its submission by the Congress:
"ARTICLE —
"On any date that the total number of vacancies In the House of Representatives exceeds half of the authorized membership thereof, and for a period of sixty days thereafter, the executive authority of each State shall have power to make temporary appointments to flit any vacancies, including those happening during such period, in the representation from his State In the House of Representatives. Any person temporarily appointed to MI any such vacancy shall serve until the people till the vacancy by election as provided for by article I, section 2, of the Constitution."
Passed the Senate May 10 (legislative day, May 2),105.
Attest:
FELTON M. JOHNSTON,
Secretary.
X
