Fordham Law School
FLASH: The Fordham Law Archive of Scholarship and History
Congressional Materials	Congressional Materials
2-19-1965
Senate Floor Debates: Presidential Disability
United States. Senate
Follow this and additional works at: https://ir.lawnet.fordham.edu/
twentyfifth_amendment_congressional_materials
Part of the Law Commons 
February 19, 1965
3250	CONGRESSIONAL RECORD - SENATE
Congress did not intend that there be any limitation at all. It was intended that a taxpayer 10 years from now, if he wished could take advantage of the new schedules. It was the intention of Congress that he make this election when he was ready and at whatever date he chose. The 3-, 4-, 5-year period should never have entered into it.
The Treasury Department by its most recent ruling has removed that time limitation. I compliment them. The Treasury Department is recognizing its error. But I point out that American business is not getting any additional tax cut that it did not have under the 1962 law or that Congress did not intend that they have fully under the 1962 law. It was not the intention of Congress that anyone who had not made this election prior to a 3-year period be deprived of it.
I repeat, this is not a new tax cut.
Mr. MANSFIELD Mr. President, I suggest the absence of a quorum.
The PRESIDING 0.torICE.K. The clerk will call the roll.
The legislative clerk proceeded to call the roll,
Mr. MANSFIELD Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent that the order for the quorum call be rescinded.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without objection, it is so ordered.
PRESIDENTIAL AND VICE-PRESIDENTIAL SUCCESSION—PRESI-DENTIAL DISABILITY
The Senate resumed the consideration of the joint resolution (S.J. Res. 1) proposing an amendment to the Constitution of the United States relating to succession to the Presidency and Vice-Presidency and to cases where the President is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office.
Mr. BAYH. Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent that the committee amendments be considered and agreed to en bloc, and that the bill as thus amended be considered as original text for the purpose of further amendment, not prejudicing the rights of any Senator to further amend the bill.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Is there objection? The Chair hears none, and it is so ordered.
The committee amendments agreed to en bloc are as follows:
On page 2, line 17, after "SEC. 3.", to strike out "If the President declares in writing" and insert "Whenever the President transmits to the President of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives his written declaration"; in line 23, after "SEc. 4.", to strike out "If the President does not so declare, and the Vice President with the written concurrence of a majority of the heads of the executive departments or such other body as Congress may by law provide, transmits to the Congress his written declaration that the President is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office, the Vice President shall immediately assume the powers and duties of the office as Acting President." and insert "Whenever the Vice President, and a majority of the principal officers of the executive departments or such other body as Congress may by law provide, transmit to the President of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives their written declaration that the President is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office, the Vice President shall immediately assume the powers and duties of the office as Acting President."; on page 3, line 13, after the word "the", where it appears the second time, to strike out "Congress" and insert "President of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives"; in line 18, after the word "the", where it appears the first time, to strike out "heads" and insert "principal officers"; and at the beginning of line 23, to strike out "will immediately" and insert "shall immediately proceed to"; so as to make the joint resolution read:
"Resolved by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled (two-thirds of each House concurring therein), That the following article is proposed as an amendment to the Constitution of the United States, which shall be valid to all intents and purposes as part of the Constitution when ratified by the legislatures of three-fourths of the several States within seven years from the date of its submission by the Congress:
" 'ARTICLE —
" 'SECTION 1. In case of the removal of the President from office or of his death or resignation, the Vice President shall become President.
"'SEc. 2. Whenever there is a vacancy in the office of the Vice President, the President shall nominate a Vice President who shall take office upon confirmation by a majority vote of both Houses of Congress.
" `SEc. 3. Whenever the President transmits to the President of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives his written declaration that he is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office, such powers and duties shall be discharged by the Vice President as Acting President.
"'SEc. 4. Whenever the Vice President, and a majority of the principal officers of the executive departments or such other body as Congress may by law provide, transmit to the President of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives their written declaration that the President is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office, the Vice President shall immediately assume the powers and duties of the office as Acting President.
"'SEc. 5. Whenever the President transmits to the President of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives his written declaration that no inability exists, he shall resume the powers and duties of his office unless the Vice President, with the written concurrence of a majority of the principal officers of the executive departments or such other body as Congress may by law provide, transmits within two days to the Congress his written declaration that the President is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office. Thereupon Congress shall immediately proceed to decide the issue. If the Congress determines by two-thirds vote of both Houses that the President is unable to discharge the powers and duties of the office, the Vice President shall continue to discharge the same as Acting President; otherwise the President shall resume the powers and duties of his office.' "
Mr. BAYH. Mr. President, I send to the desk an amendment to section 5 of the bill and ask that it be stated. I feel that this was the intention of the committee. It is a change of wording that needs to be made in order to have the bill conform to the intention of the committee. It does not change the bill in any way at all.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The clerk will state the amendments.
The LEGISLATIVE CLERK. On page 3, in line 17, strike the following: "with the
written concurrence of" and insert in lien line 20, strike the follow-
ing:	"and".
page
a: ge3
mg: "transmits within two days to the Congress his" and insert in lieu thereof. "transmit within two days to the President of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives their".
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The question is on agreeing to the amendments of the Senator from Indiana.
The amendments were agreed to.
Mr. BAYH. Mr. President, and Members of the Senate, on December 1, 1964 the President of the United States had E: small growth removed from his hand, The Nation wondered. On January 23 1965, Americans awoke to learn that during the night the President had entered the hospital with a cold. The Nation, and, indeed, much of the world worried. But we were fortunate on each of those Todayoceasions .we have a strong, forthright, and vigorous President of the United States. I might also add that we are fortunate today because we have an able-bodied and vigorous Vice President of the United States. This was not the case in the sad months following November 22, 1963.
We have not been so fortunate in the past to have had able-bodied, vigorous Presidents and Vice Presidents.
Sixteen times in the history of our country we have been without a Vice President. All Americans can recall the eight Presidents who have died in office, but our memories fail us in remembering that seven Vice Presidents died in office; and one Vice President, John Calhoun, resigned to become a U.S. Senator,
The total span during which this Nation has not had a Vice President has been in excess of 37 years.
There have been serious presidential disabilities over various periods of the history of our country. I should like to review them briefly.
President Garfield lay disabled for 80 days after being struck by the bullet of an assassin.
Ruth Silva, in her book "Presidential Succession," described that period in these words:
During these 80 days a great deal of urgent business demanded the President's immediate attention: there were postal frauds; officers did not perform their duties because they had not been commissioned; the country's foreign relations were deteriorating
* * Nearly every day the newspapers mentioned some important matter which was ignored because it required the President's personal attention.
And still there was no one to perform the functions that only the disabled President could perform.
President Wilson had a serious illness lasting 16 months. To all intents and purposes, history shows that his wife and his physician conducted the Government of the United States. No member of the Cabinet was permitted to see the President for a minute. No one could see or hear a word he said or wrote.
Presidential Assistant Joseph TumultY was not allowed to see the President. However, in good conscience, he felt he was compelled to give Mrs. Wilson a list
February 19, 1965	CONGRESSIONAL RECORD - SENATE
3251
of business which he felt needed Presidential action.
I quote from Eugene Smith's "When the Cheering Stopped," relating to that
time:
The railways taken over during the war still awaited return to their owners, the Costa Rican recognition matter was still up in the air, a commission to deal with the mining strike situation should be appointed, the Secretaries of the Treasury and the Interior and the Assistant Secretary of Agriculture needed replacements, there were vacancies in the Civil Service Commission, Federal Trade Commission, Interstate Commerce Commission, Shipping Board, Tariff Committee and other agencies, and that diplomatic appointments were needed for Bulgaria, China, Costa Rica (if recognized), Italy, the Netherlands, Salvador, Siam, and Switzerland. Also, the Democratic leadership in the Senate desperately wanted an expression of Wilson's policy in dealing with the Lodge amendments to U.S. entry into the League of Nations.
Subsequently, without Presidential advice, America's entry, and later the League of Nations itself, failed.
President Cleveland underwent a major operation, in complete secrecy, aboard a private yacht cruising off Long Island.
More recently, in the memory of all of us, President Eisenhower had three serious illnesses. The Vice President, Mr. Richard Nixon, in his book "Six Crises," describes the period surrounding the Presidential heart attack on September 24, 1955, as a period of "governmental lull."
However, if it was a period of governmental lull, I wonder what a period of governmental crisis would have been. I quote from the New York Times of September 27, 1955, relating to the times in which we lived:
Top-level decisions were pending on disarmament policy, budgetary problems, military force levels, certain politicostrategic questions, withdrawal of troops from Korea, future military policy toward Formosa, and reduction of forces in Japan.
For some 2 months after President Eisenhower's heart attack the Government was directed, for all intents and Purposes, by a six-man committee, comprised of Vice President Nixon, Presidential Assistant Sherman Adams, Mr. Dulles, Secretary of State, Attorney General Brownell, Secretary of the Treasury Humphrey, and General Persons.
Vice President Nixon wrote of this period in his "Six Crises":
Although it was hardly mentioned, I am certain that many of us realized our team-government would be inadequate to handle an international crisis, such as a brush-fire war or an internal uprising in a friendly country or a crisis of any ally. The ever-present possibility of an attack on the United. States was always hanging over us. Would the President be well enough to make the decision? If not, who had the authority to push the button?
Vice President Nixon, after President Eisenhower's second illness, which was a 30-minute operation for an attack of ileitis on June 8, 1956, says, in his book "Six Crises":
On several occasions afterwards he (Eisenhower) pointed out to me that for the 2 hours he was under anesthesia the country was without a chief executive, the Armed Forces without a Commander in Chief. In the event of a national emergency during those 2 hours, who would have had the undisputed authority to act for a completely disabled President?
Again, Vice President Nixon, on President Eisenhower's third illness, which was a stroke on November 27, 1957, stated in his book:
It was a time of international tensions. Only a month before the Soviet Union had put its first Sputnik in orbit • * *. The most immediate problem was a scheduled meeting of NATO only 3 weeks away * • *. On the domestic front, the first signs of the 1958 economic recession were becoming obvious * * *. We were having serious budget problems.
So wrote the former Vice President, who was forced to serve during three serious Presidential illnesses.
Former Attorney General Brownell, who was one of the committee of six during the illness mentioned, wrote of the half hour when President Eisenhower was unconscious during his ileitis operation that :
It was realized that the announced intention of the President to undergo a serious operation might entice a hostile foreign power to make some drastic move in the expectation of finding, at the critical moment, confused and uncertain leadership in the United States.
Senate Joint Resolution 1 is an effort to guarantee continuity within the executive branch of Government. It is designed to provide that we shall always have a President or Acting President physically and mentally alert. Second, and of equal importance, it is to assure that whoever the man may be, there will be no question as to the legality of his authority to carry out the powers and duties of the office.
Mr. LONG of Louisiana. Mr. President, will the Senator yield?
Mr. BAYH. I am glad to yield.
Mr. LONG of Louisiana. I commend the Senator for the fine work he has done both in studying the background and problem and also in bringing the measure before the Senate at this very early date. The Senator has labored long in the vineyard on this matter. I believe he managed the measure in the previous Congress, which the Senate passed. Unfortunately, on that occasion, the House failed to act. I certainly hope that the efforts of the Senator will be crowned with success, and also the efforts of his committee; and that this measure, having passed the Senate, will be promptly acted upon by the House of Representatives in the first session of Congress.
Mr. BAYH. I am grateful to the Senator for his kind words. I know of his long interest in this subject and have discussed it with him. I know of his concern that this loophole in the Constitution of the United States should be filled.
(At this point Mr. PELL took the chair as Presiding Officer.)
Mr. BAYH. Mr. President, let me review for a moment what has gone on before, to establish and clarify the Execu tive authority of the U.S. Government. First, I refer to article II, section 1 of the Constitution.
I believe we should refer to article II, section 1 of the Constitution on this particular question. The contents of article II deal with the responsibility of the Executive authority in our country.
Section 1 specifies:
The executive Power shall be vested in a President of the United States of America. He shall hold his Office during the Term of four Years, and, together with the Vice President, chosen for the same Term, be elected, as follows
In addition, article II, following the Executive powers, or executive contingencies, deals with the selection of electors, it deals with the manner in which the President and Vice President shall be elected. This, let me point out, has subsequently been amended in the 12th amendment. It deals with the qualifications which are prescribed for the President and the Vice President. It deals with Presidential compensation. It deals with the oath of office which the President is required to take. It deals, most important of all, with the powers and duties which are given to the President. It deals with messages—the state of the Union message, and others—which the President may make to the Congress. It also provides for the event of removal, death, resignation, or inability of the President.
I should like to read this last provision, because it is this provision with which we are dealing specifically in Senate Joint Resolution I.
The clause reads as follows:
In case of the Removal of the President from Office, or of his Death, Resignation, or Inability to discharge the Powers and Duties of the said Office, the Same shall devolve on the Vice President, and the Congress may by Law provide for the Case of Removal, Death, Resignation or Inability, both of the President and Vice President, declaring what Officer shall then act as President, and such Officer shall act accordingly, until the Disability be removed, or a President shall be elected.
Senate Joint Resolution 1 is designed to clarify the ambiguity, and remove the uncertainty and doubt which have been raised over the years by this clause.
I ask unanimous consent to have printed in the RECORD the text of Senate Joint Resolution 1, as amended by the committee, and more recently amended by unanimous consent of the Senate.
There being no objection, the joint resolution, as amended, was ordered to be printed in the RECORD, as follows:
S.J. Has. 1
Joint resolution proposing an amendment to
the Constitution of the United States relating to succession to the Presidency and Vice-Presidency and to cases where the President in unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office
Resolved by the Senate and House of Rep-
resentatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled (two-thirds of each. House concurring therein), That the following article is proposed as an amendment to the Constitution of the United States, which shall be valid to all intents and purposes as part of the Constitution when ratified by the legislatures of three-fourths of the several
3252	CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE	February 19, 1965
States within seven years from the date of its submission by the Congress:
"ARTICLE —
"SECTION 1. In case of the removal of the President from office or of his death or resignation, the Vice President shall become President.
"SEC. 2. Whenever there is a vacancy in the office of the Vice President, the President shall nominate a Vice President who shall take office upon confirmation by a majority vote of both Houses of Congress.
"SEc. 3. Whenever the President transmits to the President of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives his written declaration that he is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office, such powers and duties shall be discharged by the Vice President as Acting President.
"SEc. 4. Whenever the Vice President, and a majority of the principal officers of the executive departments or such other body as Congress may by law provide, transmit to the President of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives their written declaration that the President is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office, the Vice President shall immediately assume the powers and duties of the office as Acting President.
"SEE. 5. Whenever the President -transmits to the President of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives his written declaration that no inability exists, he shall resume the powers and duties of his office unless the Vice President, and a majority of the principal officers -of the executive departments or such other body as Congress may by law provide, transmit within two days to the President of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives their written declaration that the President is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office. Thereupon Congress shall immediately proceed to decide the issue. if the Congress determines by two-thirds vote of both Houses that the President is unable to discharge the powers and duties of the office, the Vice President shall continue to discharge the same as Acting President; otherwise the President shall resume the powers and duties of his office."
Mr. BAYH. Mr. President, Senate Joint Resolution 1 removes all doubt about the Vice President succeeding to the office of President.
There may be some Senators who might believe it rather foolish to deal with a problem of this kind when all America takes it for granted. All America does not take it for granted. There is significant constitutional authority, and constitutional scholars are concerned about the fact that there still is a scintilla of doubt as to whether the President, upon dying, is succeeded by the Vice President who succeeds to the office as President, or merely assumes the powers and duties of the office as Acting President.
I ask Senators to recall with me the first tragedy which occurred when President William Henry Harrison was lost, and he was succeeded by the then Vice President Tyler. The first papers which were given to the new President to sign contained under his name the words "Acting President." Subsequently, a close analysis of what our constitutional forefathers discussed in the Constitutional Convention leads us to believe that there was good reason for including the words "Acting President."
Inasmuch as Vice President Tyler decided that he did not wish to be acting President, that he wished to be Presi dent, he struck the word "acting." Ever since that time, it has become so entrenched in the laws of the land that it is indeed the law of the land today.
We feel that we should remove any doubt whatsoever about this issue. The point is not so ridiculous as it seems because on December 10, 1963, following the tragedy in Dallas, Tex., the New York Times published an article concerning a New Mexico lawyer named Leonard Jones, who had forwarded a brief to the Attorney General challenging the right of President Johnson to take the oath of office as President, rather than the oath as Acting President. I also point out that the 22d amendment to the Constitution which is a relatively recent amendment, reads in part as follows:
SECTION 1. No person shall be elected to the office of the President more than twice, and no person who has held the office of President, or acted as President—
I emphasize the word "acted"—for more than two years of a term to which some other person was elected President -shall be elected to the office of the President more than once.
Therefore, in the recent history of amending the Constitution, we have referred to the possibility of the Vice President perhaps being Acting President instead of being President. This can be remedied and should be, I feel—and will be—by specifying, as we do, in section 1 of Senate Joint Resolution 1, that upon the death of the President, the Vice President shall become the President.
It also provides that in the event there-is a Vice-Presidential vacancy either because of death, resignation, or removal—of either Vice President or President, both cases of which would result in a vacancy—the President would be nominated by a majority vote in both Houses of Congress, and subsequently a new Vice President would be elected, who would, in fact, be the Vice President.
This formula provides, first, that there would be a Vice President at all times; second, that there would be a Vice President who would be acceptable to the President, a Vice President with whom the President could work.
I hope all Senators will agree with me that at a time of international crisis, such as the death of a President in the United States, the last thing we would need would be a Vice President with whom the President could not get along.
Third, it would provide for a Vice President who would have received a vote of confidence and would have been, in fact, elected by the Members of both Houses who have the responsibility for being close to the people and knowing what they desire and expressing their wishes in Congress.
I should like to emphasize briefly for the RECORD the importance of having a Vice President at all times.
I do not believe that there is any office in existence which has been sub-
jected to more puns and ridicule at one
time or another in the history of our
country than the office of Vice President.
This might have been well directed toward some Vice Presidents at an earlier age in the development of the country, but today we have seen a rapid develop.. ment in the office of Vice President to the point where he is now a full-time officeholder.
Today, the Vice President is not a figurehead. He is the chief ambassador of our country, traveling all over the world carrying the flag and the good will of America with him. He sits in at Cabinet meetings. He is a member of the National Security Council. He is Chairman of the National Aeronautic and Space Administration. He is Chairman of the President's Committee on Equal Employment Opportunity. He presides over the Senate. He has the opportu-nity—and I feel that he should—to relieve the President of many of the social obligations which rest upon the Chief of State.
In addition, the Vice President is only one heartbeat away from the most powerful office in the world.
Therefore, I believe that it is abundantly clear that we need provisions in the Constitution to enable the United States to have a Vice President at all times.
Let me hastily point out that in the area of succession Congress has dealt with the problem on three occasions—in 1792, 1886, and 1894. On all three occasions it did not deal with replacing a Vice President or with the necessity of finding someone to serve as President when the President was unable to perform the powers and duties of his office, but only with the contingency that would arise when both the President and Vice President were removed.
Let us paces quickly to sections 3, 4, and 5 of the joint resolution, which' deal
with the inability of the President to carry out the powers and duties of his office.
Searching high and low for the intent of our Founding Fathers for a
reference to which I referred earlier,
first, inability and, second, disability, we find little solace in the notes on the Con-
stitutional Convention. Only one question was raised on this point, and that was raised by John Dickinson of Delaware, wnen he rose on the floor and said:
What is meant by the term "disability," and who shall determine it?
To that question no answer was given. That is the only reference to this subject.
Mr. President, absent any direction by our Constitutional Fathers, we have been drifting on a sea of indecision for the best part of two centuries. We have not dealt with the admittedly complicated problem of Presidential inability.
Let us consider how Senate Joint Resolution 1 deals with the problem.
Section 3 specifies that the President may voluntarily declare his own disability, and, upon doing so, and upon transmitting to the Speaker of the House and the President of the Senate his written declaration, the Vice President shall assume the powers and duties of the office as Acting President for the duration of the President's illness or disability.
Let me emphasize two things. The Vice President assumes only the powers
February 19, 1965	CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE	3253
find duties of the office, not the office itself, and does not become President but, in fact, is only Acting President.
This, I think, is a reasonable assumption to make. It is an assumption which the Attorney General made in testifying before our committee. It is the assumption that Presidential power given up voluntarily may be assumed in the same manner in which it was given when the President desires to do so.
Mr. HRUSKA. Mr. President, will the Senator yield, or would he prefer to finish his statement before yielding for a question?
Mr. BAYH. How extensively does the Senator wish to interrogate me?
Mr. HRUSKA. This deals with the Vice President assuming the powers and duties of the Presidency as Acting President. I should like to ask only a brief question on that point.
Mr. BAYH. I yield. I do not desire to avoid questions from my good friend from Nebraska, who I am sure has many penetrating questions to ask. However, I would like to complete my statement and not yield if the questioning is to be extensive.
Mr. HRUSKA. I have only a brief question.
Mr. BAYH. I yield.
Mr. HRUSKA. In regard to the question of the Vice President assuming the powers and duties of the President's office, may I ask whether there is any language in the joint resolution for creating the office of Acting President if the Vice President then in office is disabled and unable to act?
Mr. BAYH. There is not.
Mr. HRUSKA. There is not?
Mr. BAYH. No; not as long as there is a Vice President who is merely Acting President, and the President is alive.
Mr. HRUSKA. But if the President is disabled or is incompetent or for some other reason is not able to assume the duties and powers of the Presidency, under the joint resolution there will be no means by which a Vice President can be selected. Is that correct?
Mr. BAYH. The Senator is correct. I might elaborate on that point by giving the feeling of the sponsors as well as the members of the committee, by trying to incorporate very quickly some of the testimony which was brought before the committee. As the Senator knows well, and as I mentioned a moment ago, Congress has dealt with the problem of Presidential and Vice-Presidential deaths in three succession acts. Therefore, the Speaker of the House is next in line. We could become entangled in the question of separation of powers more than we have. Would the Speaker have to give up his office or resign from Congress? We have dealt with the two most important emergencies so far as the Executive is concerned, first, the need to have a Vice President at all times and, second, to have an able-bodied President. We feel that we should get this provision into the Constitution and then deal with some of the other eventualities and perhaps propose another constitutional amendment.
Mr. HRUSKA. That is one of the weaknesses in putting all these proce dures into a constitutional amendment. There is no flexibility which would be called for in the event of a contingency which is not covered in a constitutional amendment. It would necessitate a long, extended and rather tortuous course under another constitutional amendment.
Mr. BAYH. It depends on whether the Senator feels that the removal of the President from office even temporarily is of such significance that we should incorporate within the Constitution certain basic provisions that must be followed and the protections that must be given to the President, such as the protections already given, as in the case of impeachment, and such provisions as that under the 12th amendment so far as only the President is concerned.
Mr. HRUSKA. In the amendment which I understand will be offered by the Senator from Illinois [Mr. Dnucsarrl , provision is made for the contingency in this language:
The Congress may by law provide for other cases of removal, death, resignation, or inability of either the President or Vice President.
That contingency with respect to the Vice President is not contained in Senate Joint Resolution 1.
Mr. BAYH. The Senator is correct. It is not.
Mr. 1-1.1-LUSKA. I thank the Senator.
Mr. BAYH. I trust that we shall have the opportunity to discuss in some detail the relative merits of dealing with the question by statute compared with dealing with it by constitutional amendment, because I believe this is a question which should be discussed. I have certain strong feelings on the question, which are supported by a majority of the com-mittee—though my friend from Nebraska disagrees with them—that a statutory approach would be insufficient to deal with the problem. We have a difference of opinion, to be sure.
Mr. HRUSK. I thank the Senator for his courtesy.
Mr. ELLENDER. Mr. President, since the Senator from Indiana has yielded to my good friend the Senator from Nebraska, will he yield to me?
Mr. BAYH. I yield.
Mr. ELLENDER. Article II of the Constitution gives to the Congress some rights to determine who shall succeed the President. Am I to understand that one of the main purposes of the amendment is to provide for the selection of a Vice President in the event the President should die and the then Vice President should succeed him?
Mr. BAYH. That is correct.
Mr. ELLENDER. Does the Senator from Indiana concede that, other than
providing for a method of selecting a Vice President, under the Constitution the Congress would have the right to do every other thing that is provided in the joint resolution?
Mr. BAYH. I am not certain that I understand the question. The proposed
constitutional amendment would not in any way limit the powers which Congress already has to deal with the subject.
Mr. FjJ,ENDER. I am not speaking of that. Since the joint resolution relates to ways and means of selecting a Vice President should a President die and be succeeded by the then Vice President, could Congress now do everything that is proposed in the joint resolution except that part which relates to the selection of the Vice President?
Mr. BAYH. In other words, the Senator feels that Congress already has sufficient authority to deal with the question of disability.
Mr. ELLENDEXt. I am merely asking the question.
Mr. BAYH. It is my opinion that that is not the case.
Mr. FT TENDER. Will the Senator point out why? Article II of the Constitution seems very specific. It provides as follows:
In case of the removal of the President from office, or of his death, resignation, or inability to discharge the powers and duties of the said office, the same shall devolve on the Vice President—
If that should happen, we would no longer have a Vice President, for he would have taken charge.
Continuing to read from article II—
and the Congress may by law provide for the case of removal, death, resignation or inability, both of the President and Vice President, declaring what officer shall then act as President, and such officer shall act accordingly, until the disability be removed, or a President shall be elected.
The Congress has the right to do all those things now. I am wondering if Congress does not now have the authority to do everything that is proposed in the joint resolution we are now considering except providing for ways and means to select a Vice President.
Mr. BAYH. To be honest with the Senator from Louisiana, some Senators believe that Congress does have the authority. Others believe that Congress does not have the authority. The great weight of the evidence before our committee, including the message of the President of the United States and the testimony of various Attorneys Gen-eral—including former Attorney General Brownell and former Attorney General Rogers—is to the effect that now there is no power to do the things contained in the resolution.
I should like to point out the. reason behind that attitude. The joint resolution is supported by the American Bar Association and many other similar associations. Two very small words in article II, section 1, which the Senator has read, are pointed out particularly. I should like to reread that portion of the article:
In. case of the removal of the President from office, or of his death, resignation, or inability to discharge the powers and duties of the said office, the same shall devolve—
What did our Constitutional Fathers mean when they used the word "same"? Did they mean the office or the powers and duties of the office? There is a great difference when we deal with disability.
Mr. ELLENDER If a President should die and the Vice President should succeed him, the Vice President would certainly have the same powers as now devolve upon the President.
February  19, 1965
3254	CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE
Mr. BAYH. Still the question of the President coming in remains. If the President is dead and cannot resume the powers and duties of the office, it does not make any difference whether he is Acting President or President. As Henry Clay said in discussing the subject when Tyler was making the decision, it is impossible to separate the powers and duties from the office. Once the Vice President has taken over from a sick President, it is impossible for the President to resume his office if that is true. During the illness of President Garfield the unanimous feeling among members of the Cabinet at that time was that Vice President Arthur should act, that he should take over. But it was the majority feeling, which was supported by the then Attorney General, that if he did—if he once assumed the powers and duties of the office—Garfield upon recovering could not take over the office again.
Mr VT,T,ENDER. As I interpret the language of the Constitution, should the President be disabled, Congress could fix ways and means whereby the President could take over again after the disability was removed. The article states that Congress has the power to take certain action in the event of disability. The last part of the article states: "declaring what officer shall then act as President, and such officer shall act accordingly, until the disability be removed, or a President shall be elected."
That would indicate to me that if the disability were removed, Congress could certainly fix ways and means by which the President who might be disabled could resume the office.
Mr. BAYH. I should like to ask the Senator from Louisiana to go back to the language immediately prior to the point at which he started reading the last time.
Mr. ELLE[NDER. I am considering the entire section.
Mr. BAYH. I think we must look at each word individually. In part, the section states, "and the Congress may by law provide for the case of removal, death, resignation, or inability, both of the President and Vice President."
Mr. ELLENDER. Yes.
Mr. BAYH. There has been a considerable amount of opinion that Con-
gress could not provide relief by law unless both the President and the Vice
President died. The first succession stat-
ute which was passed was in 1792. It might be pointed out that many of our
constitutional fathers who attended the Constitutional Convention were in that Congress at that time.
If that had not been their interpretation, it seems to me they would have
provided for other contingencies that
would not have required both the President and the Vice President to be out
of the picture before Congress could act.
Mr. ELLENDER. As I recall, Congress provided, without constitutional amendment, for a succession to the office.
Mr. BAYH. But only in the event both the President and the Vice President were involved.
Mr. MrENDER. Yes; I understand. Mr. BAYH. We are now dealing with only one of them.
Mr. ELLENDER. I understand that. But, as I have said, it is my belief that the language of the Constitution is broad enough to permit the Congress to do the very thing which the Senator desires to be done under that joint resolution which we are now discussing except the selection and the method of selecting a Vice President.
Mr. BAYH. Although the Senator from Louisiana and I apparently differ—
Mr. ELLENDER. I am merely trying to get information.
Mr. BAYH. I must say that if the question were in the balance—if a scale were in front of me and I were asked to choose which interpretation the Constitutional Fathers meant—it would be difficult for me to decide. The distinguished Senator from Louisiana and I have spent a great deal of time discussing the question. I have tried to point out that there is a considerable doubt on the part of others. Should we not reconcile such doubt once and for all by inserting in the Constitution an amendment which would provide for these contingencies? If we should be confronted with an implementing statute that had been passed, we would be met with all the uncertainties of a court test every time we needed to use the statute. Under the proposed amendment, at any time we should need certainty of action, we would have the whole procedure of court tests before us.
Mr. FTJENDER. That may be. I point out that we may have a court test on the very language which we are now discussing. I am surprised that we have not had it up to now. As I recall Vice President Stevenson came very close, although he did not go into court.
Mr. BAYH. The constitutionality of a provision in the Constitution cannot very well be tested.
Mr. ELLENDER. I am refering to an interpretation of the provision.
Mr. BAYH. The constitutionality of a constitutional amendment has been tested?
Mr. ELLENDER. The language could be tested for a determination of its meaning.
Mr. BAYH. That is correct. But it would be necessary to test not only the intention of a statute but also its constitutionality.
We feel that there is sufficient doubt to warrant placing an amendment in the Constitution.
There is another reason for dealing with the problem by constitutional amendment. The distinguished Senator from North Carolina [Mr. Eavnkrl was one of the strong proponents of this theory in the Committee on the Judiciary. He said that by dealing with the situation by constitutional amendment, certain guarantees of Presidential action could be provided. For example, a two-thirds vote is required by Congress before the President can be removed. But if it were left to Congress to specify by law what formula should be followed, that could best be done by a majority vote. I believe that that would afford thaufa, cient protection for the President.
I believe we can deal with this problera now, after long objective study of the problem, and not be confronted with a hasty statute, which might be changed to meet the contingencies of the hour. One of the basic reasons why we believe there must be a constitutional amendment is that it would provide the greatest degree of certainty.
If I may proceed with my statement,/ shall try to answer questions later. This is a highly complicated area, as the Senator from Louisiana knows.
I have just finished stating the history of section 3, which permits the President to relinquish the powers and duties of his office during the tenure of his disability, and permits the Vice President to assume those powers and duties as Acting President.
I should like to cite one other factor that might be an answer to the question raised by the Senator from Louisiana. Although probably a statute would remove doubts from the mind of the Vice President, there has been much reluctance upon the part of previous Vice Presidents, particularly Vice Presidents Arthur and Marshall, to consider exercising the powers and duties of the office of President, because there were no statutory or constitutional provisions for them to do so. We believe that this difficulty should be cleared up once and for all, so that the Vice President can legally have the constitutional responsibility to act in the event the President is unable to do so.
Section 4 provides for the eventuality that the President is unable to make a declaration of his own inability, or for other reasons does not declare his own inability. In such an eventuality, Senate Joint Resolution 1 provides that the Vice President, acting with the concurrence of a majority of the principal officers of the executive department, or such other body as Congress may by law provide, may, by submitting a written declaration and transmitting it to the Speaker of the House and the President of the Senate, assume the powers and duties of the office of President.
It is my opinion that the Vice President has the constitutional obligation to act in the event that the welfare of the Nation demands it and the President is unable to perform the powers and duties of the office, and that the Cabinet—those who are closely associated with the President—could adequately protect the President from a coup or the usurpation of his office by a power-hungry Vice President.
Section 5 provides for the very difficult situation in which a dispute may arise between the President, on the one hand, and the Vice President and a majority of his Cabinet, on the other. For example, suppose the President says, "I have recovered," but the Vice President and a majority of the heads of the executive departments say, "Mr. President, you may be well enough to walk and talk, but we who have had an opportunity to examine you carefully and who know you well believe you have not sufficiently re-
February 19, 1965	CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE	3255
covered, and that the best interests of the country dictate that the Vice President continue to carry on the powers and duties of the office of President." In such an eventuality, the Vice President and a majority of the Cabinet taking one position, and the President taking the other, the resolution provides the only solution which I feel is feasible; namely, that congress shall decide this difficult question, and that a two-thirds vote of Congress shall be required to protect the President, similar to the two-thirds vote which is required in impeachment proceedings.
That is what Senate Joint Resolution 1 attempts to accomplish. It seeks to provide the Nation with a Vice President at all times; to provide it with an able-bodied President, or Vice President acting as President, who can adequately carry out the powers and duties of the office of President.
A question was raised by the Senator from Louisiana [Mr. ELLENDER] about the need for a constitutional amendment. I should like to list some of those who have testified before our committee believing it is imperative that there be e, constitutional amendment:
The present Attorney General, Mr. Katzenbach.
Former Attorney General Brownell and former Attorney General Rogers.
Presidents and past presidents of State bar associations.
The American Bar Association House of Delegates has unanimously recommended that a constitutional amendment be adopted.
The Committee on Economic Development was emphatic in its recent study that a constitutional amendment is required.
Paul Freund, a noted constitutional scholar at Harvard University, was equally emphatic.
Also, former President Eisenhower, former Vice President Nixon, Vice President HUMPHREY, and, more recently, President. Lyndon Johnson himself.
I should like to quote from the message that the President sent to Congress on this subject. He said:
I am, accordingly, addressing this communication to both Houses to ask that this prevailing will be translated into action Which would permit the people, through the process of constitutional amendment, to Overcome these omissions so clearly evident in our system.
*	*
Believing, as I do, that Senate Joint Reso-
lution 1 and House Joint Resolution 1—
House Joint Resolution 1 is a similar proposal and was introduced by Representative CELLER, chairman of the House Committee on the Judiciary—
Would responsibly meet the pressing need I have outlined, I urge the Congress to approve them forthwith for submission to ratification by the States.
As I said in my colloquy with the Senator from Louisiana, the basic theory has been that if there is a doubt as to whether or not a constitutional amendment is needed, we should be sure of our action. One of the main purposes for feeling that the controversial question of inability of the President should be settled by con stitutional amendment is to provide som degree of certainty if the Nation is confronted with a disabled President. Dealing with the problem in statutory form alone would create all the uncertainty of a court test of the constitutionality of the statute. That, we believe, should be avoided, if at all possible.
One of the most important elements of the ready transfer of executive authority in time of crisis is to have widespread public acceptance. On the horrible day of November 22, 1963, when President Kennedy was no longer with us, the one important fact for which we could thank God was that Lyndon Johnson, a man who was readily accepted as the Vice President, was available to move into the office of President.
It is our feeling that a constitutional amendment which is not only subjected to the scrutiny of both Houses of Congress and requires a two-thirds vote, but also must be ratified by three-fourths of the State legislatures has much wider public acceptance, and the public is much more aware of its terms than they are of a statute which is passed by a majority vote of both Houses of Congress.
The problems which I have discussed briefly are so obvious that many have asked me, "Why has not Congress solved these problems? Why has no thought been given to them?"
I have quickly come to the defense of my colleagues and our predecessors in this body by saying that it is not true that Congress has not dealt with these problems, and that no thought has been given to them. In the last session alone, we had 13 measures before the Subcommittee on Constitutional Amendments, of which I am chairman.
This year more than 30 proposals are before the House of Representatives. If there is any reason why we have not solved the problem, it is not that we have not given it much thought, but that we have been unable to reach an agreement or consensus around which we could rally a two-thirds majority.
At the risk of taking a copyrighted story of my friend, the Senator from North Carolina [Mr. EavINI, I should like to pay him the compliment of repeating one of his typical examples which he gave in the debate last year. I think this very adequately describes our problem. It tells the story, if the Senator from North Carolina recalls, of the dog that had a bone. He looked into the river and saw there the reflection of another dog who also had a bone. He thereupon reached down and dropped his bone into the river, and as a result he did not have anything. This is the quandary in which we in Congress have been driven. Everyone has insisted on his own ideas. Senate Joint Resolution. 1 is not my own amendment. It is not the amendment of any of the 70-odd cosponsors of different measures. it is the result of many hours of work and effort. Many Senators are to be complimented. The American Bar Association is to be complimented.
Mr. ERVIN. Mr. President, will the Senator yield?
Mr. BAYH. I yield.
Mr. ERVIN. In addition to the Aesop fable about the dog with the bone, a very apt adage is that "Too many cooks spoil the broth."
A multitude of amendments were offered along this line in seeking to take care of the situation. I introduced an amendment myself. I thought it was rather good. But I think the reason why we have progressed as far as we have in this matter is that the Senator from Indiana [Mr. BAYH] recognized that too many cooks can spoil the broth.
If we try to get everything to accord with our own notion, we get nothing. The Senator has recognized the need for clarification of a constitutional question. As a result of his fine example in that respect, other members of the Subcommittee on Constitutional Amendments and members of the full Committee on the Judiciary have been influenced by his example and have sacrificed their individual views in an attempt to get some proposal that would recognize the problem, the necessity for a solution to the problem, and also that there must be a good deal of give and take.
I ask the Senator if one of the great problems which was before the commit-tee—was not the question whether, in case of a vacancy, the Vice President would be appointed by the President for the sake of continuity in administration, or whether he should be elected by Congress for the sake of having some voice exercised by the representatives of the people in the selection of a Vice President.
Mr. BAYH. The Senator is correct. Those are two of the possibilities. As the Senator well recalls, two such proposals were before the Subcommittee on Constitutional Amendments. It was the opinion of the subcommittee, plus that of the American Bar Association in their consensus group, and the full Committee on the Judiciary, that by combining both presidential and congressional action, we were doing two things. We were guaranteeing that the President would have a man with whom he could work. We were also guaranteeing to the people their right to make that decision.
Mr. ERVIN. If my recollection serves me correctly—and if it does not, the Senator from Indiana can correct me because he has given great study to this measure—one of the things that former President Eisenhower emphasized was the necessity of having continuity of administration through a Vice President who was a member of the same party as the President. He laid more stress on that than on any other one thing in his advocacy of congressional action.
Mr. BAYH. The Senator is correct. As the Senator well knows, President Eisenhower who, more than any other living American, has had to deal with the problem of presidential inability, laid particular stress on the fact that this is a particular responsibility which the Vice President cannot escape.
Mr. ERVIN. The Senator from Dadi-aria will recall that I introduced an amendment to provide not only for the election of the Vice President by Congress, but also for the selection by Congress on the theory that Congress was
3256	CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE	February 19, 1965
composed of representatives of the people.
Mr. BAYH. The Senator is correct. The Senator from Indiana felt it to be important that we should get a plan which would work, rather than any particular plan.
Mr. ERVIN. Mr. President, I ask the Senator from Indiana if the committee, after studying the proposals from both inside and outside of Congress, did not finally come to the conclusion that the best thing to do to reconcile these differences and give added protection to the people would be to let the Vice President be nominated by the President, so that there would be continuity of administration in the man who might be sent to the office of the Presidency.
Mr. BAYH. The Senator is correct.
Mr. ERVIN. Was it not also felt that in order to keep the President from being a dictator, it was necessary that the nomination should be confirmed by the Senate?
Mr. BAYH. The Senator is correct. As the Senator pointed out in committee, there is some precedent, although not exactly on point, in the advice-and-consent provisions that the U.S. Senate has in dealing with executive appointments, and the great power that the President has to nominate his own Vice President in our convention.
Mr. ERVIN. This is really a conciliation of divergent views to facilitate the presentation of the amendment and give us assurance that the President will nominate the man and Congress will elect him, thus insuring that he would be a good, capable man who could cooperate with the administration.
Mr. BAYH. The Senator is correct.
Mr. ERVIN. I was interested in the colloquy engaged in by the senior Senator from Louisiana and the Senator from Indiana a moment ago with reference to the power of Congress. Does not the Senator from Indiana agree with the Senator from North Carolina that it would devolve upon Congress to designate the succession to the Vice-Presidency, and then to the Presidency, that necessarily we cannot designate individuals, but would have to designate the occupants of the particular offices, as we have always done in times past?
Mr. BAYH. The Senator is correct.
Mr. ERVIN. It would be conceivable, while that situation does not exist at the present moment under the succession statute, that the office of Vice President or President, under such a succession, could fall upon a man who was not qualified for the position.
Mr. BAYH. The Senator is correct.
Mr. ERVIN. He might be a man in whom the people would not have confidence.
Mr. BAYH. The Senator is correct.
Mr. ERVIN. And so, instead of having the man arbitrarily determined, regardless of what his particular qualifica-
tions for the Vice-Presidency might be, this resolution would allow the selection
to be made when the vacancy actually occurs; and then conceivably, of course, the President and Congress together could select the best qualified man.
Mr. BAYH. I am of the opinion that, with the provisions to which the Senator has referred, we would have a President who would be under close public scrutiny, when the main ingredient for consideration would be the qualifications of the man to succeed in that office.
Mr. ERVIN. Does not the Senator from Indiana agree with the Senator from North Carolina that the proposed amendment provides the most practical and workable solution of this problem, in that when the President is mentally capable of recognizing his disability, it provides a very easy and painless process by which that disability can be established?
Mr. BAYH. I believe this measure is as close as we are going to come to a workable plan.
Mr. ERVIN. In addition, in the adversary procedure, a majority of the members of the Cabinet must take action, and that action is subject to review by Congress.
Mr. BAYH. In essence, this action would have to be taken twice by the Vice President and Cabinet. I point out that the members of the Cabinet have been appointed by the President. They are friends of the President. They would be seeking to establish disability. They would make the declaration that the President was unable to perform his duties. He might make a declaration that he was able. The members of the Cabinet would have to make a second serious deliberation and declaration that he was unable to do so. Then two-thirds of the Congress would have to affirm that action. That is more protection than is given to a President in the event of impeachment, because it takes only a two-thirds vote of the Senate to convict and a majority of the House to impeach, whereas in this particular instance action is required by two-thirds of both Houses of Congress.
Mr. ERVIN. That would take care of preventing a situation such as occurs in South Vietnam, where the government changes almost from day to day.
Mr. BAYH. That is correct.
Mr. ERVIN. Is it not true that the requirement of a two-thirds vote prevented a tragic event in our history, when it was attempted to convict President Johnson? The impeachment failed by one vote because the Constitution provided for a two-thirds vote to convict. It would have been a tragic event if President Johnson had been convicted because only a majority vote instead of a two-thirds vote had been required.
Mr. BAYH. There have been many occasions when Congress has been controlled by one party and the President has been a member of the opposite party. Most Congresses would not attempt to remove a President because of political expediency, but let us be certain that we do not tempt some future Congress. Let us require a two-thirds vote for such action.
Mr. ERVIN. Is it not true that recommendations have been made for some action to be taken by a constitutional amendment to clarify this subject by both former President Eisenhower and Vice President Nixon, who was con. fronted with the problem of presidential disability during President Eisenhower's administration; also, was it not recommended by the late President John F, Kennedy, and is it now not recommended by President Johnson?
Mr. BAYH. In all honesty, I do not have the record of the late President Kennedy's position on this question. I know of no statement he made publicly, But everyone else to whom the Senator has referred is on record. We have written testimony in the committee hearings from both the former President and Vice President, as well as the present President and Vice President.
Mr ERVIN. I thank the Senator for yielding. I commend him for the work he has done as chairman of the Subcommittee on Constitutional Amendments and for bringing this measure to the floor of the Senate. It is due more to his effort than that of the other members of the committee that the proposed legislation is in as fine a form as it is.
Mr. BAYH. I thank the Senator from North Carolina for his kind remarks. Much as I appreciate them, I do not believe I deserve that praise. It has been my responsibility as chairman of the Subcommittee on Constitutional Amendments and author of one of these measures to try to work out a solution. It would have been impossible to get as far as we have gone if it had not been for the help of Senators who have studied this problem over a longer period of years than I have. Many of our colleagues had measures which they were willing to forgo in order to come to a consensus,
There may have been times in the history of our country when the health of a particular President at a given hour was not of international importance, or when the existence of an able-bodied Vice President was not of international importance, when the pigeon was our most rapid means of communication, when horse-drawn caissons were one of the prime ingredients of an artillery unit. Perhaps it would not have been too bad in those days, but now we can move armies halfway around the world in a matter of hours, and we can destroy our entire civilization in a matter of minutes. I believe it is imperative that we take some action. This has been a give and take and we have come up with a con-
sensus. History has been trying to teach us a lesson. I suggest that we try to
learn from that lesson. We should accept this measure and send it to the State legislatures.
Mr. ELLENDER. Mr. President, will the Senator yield for a question?
Mr. BAYH. I yield.
Mr. ELT,PINDER. The distinguished Senator from Indiana has stated that he
placed a great deal of confidence in the
members of the Cabinet and in their being able to act. Why the provision in
the joint resolution for some other body
to pass upon this matter? Why bring Congress into it, since the Senator wants
to make it more or less definitive? Why not make it specific that the Cabinet, by a majority, and the Vice President shall decide the question? Why is it neces-
February 19, 1965	CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE	3257
eery to put it in the hands of Congress by giving Congress the right to appoint a body which it might see fit to select?
Mr. BAYH. That provision was included in the original measure as a result of the consensus for which we have striven. I hope Congress will pass upon it, but I am certain that the Senator will admit that Congress is not infallible. We cannot foresee all contingencies. We do not know whether the Cabinet will reach an insurmountable obstacle. This measure provides that some other body in the future can be provided for, giving it some flexibility.
Mr. ELLENDER. Does the Senator mean that if a majority of the Cabinet could not act and choose, Congress would then provide for the selection of a group which might do so?
Mr. BAYH. If the Cabinet approach proved unworkable, Congress could provide another body. This would have to be done by law, and the Congress would have to override a veto, if there were one.
Mr. ELLENDER. Suppose the Vice President is not in accord with the Cabinet members, does the Senator believe that if Congress tried to provide a separate body, as this recommendation indicates, the Vice President might be tempted to veto such a measure?
Mr. BAYH. The Vice President?
Mr. ELLENDER. Yes. I mean, if he is Acting President.
Mr. BAYH. I am not certain I understand the Senator's question, because the decision has already been made.
Mr. ELLENDER. But the Senator, as I understand it, has not been specific. Evidently this provision has been submitted to satisfy some Senators or someone who favors the bill.
Mr. BAYH. The feeling is that we need a degree of flexibility so far as that particular part of the bill is concerned.
Mr. ELLENDER. When would such a body be selected by Congress? Under what conditions could the Congress act?
Mr. BAYH. At any time the Congress felt that the Cabinet was serving as an arbitrary obstacle to what was in the best interests of the Nation, namely, the President was obviously deranged, yet the Cabinet would not cooperate with the Vice President—I suppose it could, and it could attempt to establish another body.
Mr. ELLENDER. That would have to be done by an act of Congress.
Mr. BAYH. The Senator is correct; that would have to be done by an act of Congress.
Mr. ELLENDER. I presume that the acting President would have the right to veto the measure?
Mr. BAYH. The Senator is correct; I am sure he would have that right.
Mr. ELLENDER. Suppose the Vice President acts with the Cabinet, and he is in favor of what the Cabinet does, and Congress should pass such a measure, he could veto it?
Mr. BAYH. He could veto it; that is correct.
Mr. ELLENDER. Does not the Senator believe that the Vice President would be tempted to do it, if he is not in agreement with the decision reached by the Cabinet?
CXI-207
Mr. BAYH. The only time that Congress would provide another body would be when it was in disagreement with the Vice President, I would think. If the Vice President is in office, if he has assumed the powers and duties as Acting President, he must have acted in agreement with the Cabinet. Then the Congress would have to feel that the Cabinet or the Vice President acted wrongly, would it not, and that the Vice President should not be there.
Congress has that power now, one-third plus one can keep the Vice President from continuing in office now. It would take two-thirds to override a veto, but would need only one-third plus one.
Mr. ELLENDER. As I understood the Senator a while ago, he wished to make this resolution cover all and leave Congress out. As I stated a while ago, it would seem to me that Congress has the right or the power to do everything that this resolution provides, except the method of selection of a Vice President. I am surprised that the resolution should bring in the Congress to be able to create a body in the event of disagreement between Cabinet and Vice President.
Mr. BAYH. It is entirely a different set of circumstances, it seems to me, although I have no objection to Congress dealing with it. Presently, I do not feel that it has the constitutional authority. I am suggesting and the resolution is suggesting that Congress should be kept in as a check and a balance.
Mr. President, at this point I should like to yield briefly to the Senator from Illinois [Mr. DratcsEx].
Mr. DIRKSEN. I thank the Senator from Indiana for yielding to me.
Mr. President, I should like to submit amendment No. 33, and ask that it be stated.
The PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. HARRIS in the chair). The amendment will be stated for the information of the Senate.
The LEGISLATIVE CLERK. It is intended to be proposed by Mr. DIRKSEN as a substitute for the language of Senate Joint Resolution 1:
That the following article is proposed as an amendment to the Constitution of the United States, which shall be valid to all intents and purposes as part of the Constitution when ratified by the legislatures of three-fourths of the several States within seven years from the date of its submission by the Congress:
"ARTICLE —
"In case of the removal of the President from office or of his death or resignation, the said office shall devolve on the Vice President. In else of the inability of the President to discharge the powers and duties of the said office, the said powers and duties shall devolve on the Vice President, as Acting President until the inability be removed. The Congress may by law provide for other cases of removal, death, resignation, or inability, of either the President or Vice President, declaring what officer shall then be President or Vice President, or in case of inability, act as President, and such officer shall be or act as President accordingly, until a President shall be elected or, in the case of inability, until the inability shall be earlier removed. The commencement and termination of any inability shall be determined by such method as Congress may by law provide."
Mr. DIRKSEN. Mr. President, I shall not discuss the amendment at this moment. I am grateful to the Senator from Indiana [Mr. BaYal for permitting me to offer it at this time. It is actually a substitute for the entire proposal that comes from the committee.
Mr. SIMPSON. Mr. President, will the Senator from Indiana yield?
Mr. BAYH. I yield.
Mr. SIMPSON. Mr. President, let me first of all compliment the able and distinguished junior Senator from Indiana [Mr. BATH] for a very fine presentation with respect to this all important subject.
Mr. President, as a cosponsor of this proposed legislation, the record has been filled with interesting materials on the history of this Nation which clearly shows the need for complete and adequate laws regulating the succession to the office of the President of the United States. A great many Members of Congress have made reference to the days of President Eisenhower's illnesses and the questions that arose during that time about the authority of the office of the President and the responsibilities of the Vice President.
In earlier history, the administrations of Presidents Garfield and Wilson were challenged by the same questions. Fortunately, the Nation was permitted to endure these times of crisis and has grown and prospered in spite of the inadequacies and doubts that we have concerning the highest office in the land.
Directly relating to the problem of Presidential inability is that of a vacancy in the office of Vice President. That office has been vacated 16 times in the Nation's history for a total period of 38 years.
In past years, the office of Vice President was subject to more ridicule than respect, but such is not the case today. Vice President Richard Nixon brought a new respect to the office because of the yeoman service that he gave to the Nation and to the world. The Vice President is the possible successor to the Nation's highest office. He has many responsibilities. I feel there is ample evidence that the United States needs a Vice President at all times. I believe that the constitutional proposal we are discussing today sets forth a reasonable and complete plan for providing for Presidential inability and vacancies in the office of Vice President.
I am pleased to have been a cosponsor of this proposed constitutional amendment, both in the 88th and the 89th Congresses. As indicated, the need for this type of action is long overdue. Unfortunately, it was not until the tragedy of November 1963, that we realized the possible consequences of not having a clear and adequate plan for succession to our executive offices.
Many of the great legal minds throughout the country have studied this proposed constitutional amendment and I believe, for the most part, are in full support of it. It is the simplicity of the proposal that gives it strength and, thus, makes it appealing.
The first section of the resolution provides that the Vice President will become
3258	CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE	February 19, 1965
President in the case of death or resignation of the President. When there is a vacancy in the office of the Vice-Presidency, the President is to nominate a Vice President who will take office upon confirmation by a majority vote of both Houses of Congress.
Section 3 provides that if the President declares in writing that he is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office, the Vice President shall act as President.
Under the terms of this proposed constitutional amendment, the Vice President and the majority of the Cabinet members can determine the President to be disabled. If the President disputes the decision of the Vice President and the Cabinet members, Congress will decide the issue.
Seldom does the Senate agree unanimously on a problem of such magnitude and importance as is this proposed constitutional amendment on presidential inability and vacancies in the office of Vice President, but last year when we considered the matter, there was not a dissenting vote.
It is my hope that this proposal will receive the approval of Congress and the necessary States so that the people of America can be assured that we will have a leader to deal with any crisis that may arise. I am proud to support this proposal.
Mr. BAYH. I thank my colleague, the distinguished Senator from Wyoming [Mr. Srmesox], for his articulate presentation.
Mr. STENNIS. Mr. President, a parliamentary inquiry.
The PRESIDING ObVICER. The Senator from Mississippi will state it.
Mr. STENNIS. Does the Senator from Indiana have the floor?
The PRESIDING OFFIclitt. The Senator from Indiana [Mr. BAYR] yielded to the Senator from Wyoming [Mr. SIMPSON].
Mr. BAYH. Mr. President, I have finished my presentation. I am ready to accept any questions Senators may wish to ask.
Mr. TYDINGS. Mr. President, will the Senator from Indiana yield?
Mr. BAYH. I yield.
Mr. TYDINGS. One of the points made by the distinguished Senator from Louisiana [Mr. ELLENDER] questioned the language in section 4, which reads as follows:
Whenever the Vice President, and a majority of the principal officers of the executive department of such other body as Congress may by law provide—
This seems to be one of the phrases which was providing some concern to the Senator from Louisiana [Mr. ELLENDER].
My recollection of the committee hearings is that the reason for inserting the language "principal officers of the executive department or such other body as Congress may by law provide" VMS occasioned by the history of the development of our Cabinet. Originally the Cabinet consisted of four members. Subsequently, it was enlarged. Today the Cabinet consists of 10 members.
It was felt that perhaps in another year or two Congress might create a new post in the Cabinet. Congress might feel that the Chairman of the National Security Council or some other important official ought to be included in the Cabinet.
Therefore, we wanted to provide a little flexibility in the constitutional amendment, so that Congress could adjust the circumstances as it wished.
That is my recollection of the principal reason why this language was placed in the joint resolution.
NEED FOR FOLLOW-ON MANNED
BOMBER
Mr. STENNIS. Mr. President, I must again express my mounting concern and alarm over what I consider to be a dangerous and unwarranted gamble with our future national security. I refer to the continued and deliberate delay in authorizing the development of a follow-on strategic bomber.
As the Senate will recall, the Secretary of Defense last year requested only $5 million for this program. The Congress, however, took a different view and authorized and appropriated $52 million in fiscal year 1965 funds for an advanced manned strategic aircraft. This was done after Gen. Curtis E. LeMay, then Chief of Staff of the Air Force, had told us positively and flatly that it was of the utmost urgency that action be commenced immediately for the orderly and expeditious development and ultimate procurement of a new bomber. General LeMay, in his characteristic frank and candid fashion, said:
I am afraid the B-52 is going to fall apart on us before we can get a replacement for it. There is a serious danger that this may happen.
This warning and advice of the world's greatest expert on strategic airpower went unheeded by his civilian superiors. The development of a follow-on strategic bomber as a system was not approved. Only a portion of the $52 million appropriated by the Congress was released by the Secretary of Defense and the funds which were released were primarily for the study of propulsion systems and avionics. While these matters are, of course, important in the development of a follow-on manned aircraft, they are of general application in the aviation field.
The situation is the same this year. The defense message which the President sent to the Congress on January 18, 1965, made it clear that the follow-on manned bomber is still being delayed. The President said we are "continuing development of engines and other systems for advanced aircraft to retain our option for a new manned bomber. I completely disagree, I think the need has already arisen."
This subject has been before Congress more than once in the last 2 or 3 years, and time and again it has appropriated additional funds for this purpose, but each time only a portion of the money appropriated has been released.
Let us take a look at the facts. For the first time in the history of American strategic air power, there is no follow-on manned bomber under development. Our B-47 aircraft are being phased out. The B-52 has been in the inventory for more than 10 years and it is only through costly modifications that the service life of these aircraft can be extended. More than $300 million is being requested in the fiscal year 1966 budget for this purpose. Two squadrons of the earlier and older B-52's are already being phased out.
These 52 bombers, on which we rely chiefly, have not been produced since 1962.
In the absence of a program for developing a follow-on bomber, the modification of the B-52's appears to be an essential but risky venture--essential because we have no other choice in the light of the decision not to proceed with the development of a new aircraft risky because there can be no guarantee that these aircraft will be capable of performing their mission in the 1970's or that they will not be subject to some catastrophic failure from fatigue and old age, with an attendant and tragic loss of American lives which could be avoided by timely action.
The remaining strategic bomber—the B-58—will also be obsolete in the 1970's. Only about 80 of these aircraft are in the operational inventory. The last one came off the production line in the fall of 1962.
Thus, the two strategic aircraft which will remain in the operational inventory after the phase out of the B-47's, that is, the B-52's and the B-58's, were both designed and developed in the 1950's. Both have proved themselves to be excellent weapons systems. However, with the passage of the years, both will become increasingly ineffective and will ultimately die as a result of fatigue and operational use for which they were not designed.
Under present planning, there is little prospect of an early start on the actual development of a new bomber. As a matter of fact, there is no assurance that the effort will ever advance beyond the current low level study phase. Even if a decision to go ahead was made today, it would be perhaps 8 to 10 years before the new bomber could join the operational inventory in significant numbers. Thus, under present planning, we will enter the 1970's
with the bulk of our strategic aircraft fleet being 15 years old. Never before in
our history—not even in the lean years prior to World War II—have we dared to place our strategic airpower reliance upon a 15-year-old plane.
We are, therefore, faced with the prospect of a tremendous and dangerous gap
in our strategic bomber capabilities. The inevitability of this gap will become more pronounced each day that the decision to proceed with the follow-on bomber is postponed.
We have a tremendous investment—built up over the past 20 years—in our
strategic retaliatory forces. They now
constitute a superb offensive lighting machine which has been successful in
deterring a general nuclear war. BY its awesome capability and overwhelming superiority, this force has maintained the uneasy peace and has discouraged
February 19, 1965	CONGRESSIONAL RECORD - SENATE	3261
liens of dollars. But suppose it cost a number of billion dollars. If it would save the lives of millions of Americans, Which it is admitted it will do—it is said that it would save 30 or 40 million Amer-icans—I say it is worth the cost.
Further, the destruction that could be wrought in one or two of the cities in this Nation alone would amount to as much as the cost of moving forward with that system. I think we are making a mistake in not moving forward and building the antiballistic missile system. I think we are making a mistake in not going forward and building these strategic bombers which we need in order to have a deterrent to the Communists. This would be a credible deterrent. Building these bombers would help to avert a war. Building these bombers and having them ready to go would be a tremendous deterrent. It might keep this country out of an all-out war.
I commend the able Senator from Mississippi for calling attention to this important matter at this time. I hope that Congress will not delay any longer on this matter.
Mr. STENNIS. Mr. President, I thank the Senator.
I was asked a question by the. Senator from Ohio concerning some budgetary figures. As I said, there is $3 million provided in the 1966 budget for system studies of a new manned bomber. This is a relatively small amount for a matter as important as this. It will mean that the system studies will necessarily be on a low-level basis.
In the 1966 budget there is also $24 million for propulsion and $12 million for avionics. These matters are, of course, important in the development of an advanced strategic bomber. But they are also of more general application and their finding does not mean that there has been a decision to go ahead with a new bomber system. In fact, it is clear that the decision is not to go ahead with this. My plea is for a "green light" for the development of a follow-on bomber as a weapon system. I believe we should go ahead as soon as possible. Anything short of that will not meet the demands of our future security. If it requires $50 million or more in 1966, to give it the high priority that it really deserves we should provide it.
Mr. CARLSON. Mr. President, will the Senator yield?
Mr. STENNIS. I yield.
Mr. CARLSON. I commend the distinguished Senator from Mississippi for railing the attention of the Senate and the country to a situation that concerns, I am sure, every Member of Congress. That situation pertains to the future strategic bombers that are to be built to Protect this great Nation. Those of us who have followed the development of these planes in the past have been greatly concerned over their deterioration, their being phased out, and the fact that no effort, or at least no substantial effort, is being made to begin to get the plans on the drawing boards.
I was amazed at the figures read by the Senator from Mississippi concerning the amount that we are to spend on research and development of planes that are absolutely necessary if we are to preserve the defense of this great country. I commend the Senator for calling attention to this matter.
Mr. STENNIS. I thank the Senator. I hope that my presentation of this information will bring it into focus for the consideration of the proper committees when they study our military program.
Mr. ERVIN. I ask the Senator from Mississippi if one vital distinction between a missile and a long-range bomber is not that when the missile is once fired, it is gone forever.
Mr. STENNIS. The Senator is correct.
Mr. ERVIN. A long-range bomber can carry a load of bombs and, if it is not shot down, it can come back and carry another load.
Mr. STENNIS. The Senator is correct. It is ready for use again. It has that human brain in it, too.
Mr. ERVIN. Mr. President, I ask the Senator if a normal missile would be equipped to carry a nuclear warhead.
Mr. STENNIS. The Senator is correct.
Mr. ERVIN. On the contrary, a long-range bomber can carry a load of conventional or nuclear bombs, depending upon which is advisable in the particular movement that is being made.
Mr. STENNIS. The Senator is correct. All it requires is changing the bomb racks.
Mr. ERVIN. They are more flexible.
Mr. STENNIS. The Senator is correct. Their great virtue is their flexibility.
Mr. ERVIN. Mr. President, I ask the Senator from Mississippi if most of the missiles are not stationary, and therefore subject to hostile action.
Mr. STENNIS. The Senator is correct. They are sitting targets. The question is, How well can we protect them? We think we have them protected as well as man can protect them. But there is a question of whether that is sufficient protection.
Mr. ERVIN. Is it not true that long-range bombers could be placed in motion in the event of a hostile attack, and therefore they are far less vulnerable to attack than a missile?
Mr. STENNIS. The Senator is correct.
Mr. ERVIN. I know that the Senator from Mississippi, because of his service on the Armed Services Committee, believes, as I do, that we need an adequate number of both missiles and long-range bombers.
Mr. STENNIS. That is the mixed concept that we have been talking about. We do not want to detract from our missiles. But there is always some uncertainty about being able to protect them. There is some uncertainty as to the extent to which they are vulnerable. To abandon the concept of a new bomber is unthinkable to me.
Mr. ERVIN. Does not the Senator from Mississippi know, as a member of the Armed Services Committee, that virtually all the men who have devoted their lives to the military service and have spent their days and nights studying how this country should be defended, recommend that we should have a program for renewing our long-range bombers?
Mr. STENNIS. The Senator is correct. I quoted some of the chief ones a few moments ago.
Mr. ERVIN. Does not the Senator from Mississippi agree that when we get down to the fact that we cannot foretell what precise weapons we shall need in these two areas or whether we need them both, it is the height of folly for the sake of economy or anything else, not to be prepared with both missiles and long-range bombers?
Mr. STENNIS. We cannot afford to do otherwise.
Mr. ERVIN. There is no advantage in having Uncle Sam become the richest man in the graveyard by virtue of having saved some money that should have been spent for long-range bombers.
Mr. STENNIS. The Senator has expressed it very well, as usual.
I shall review quite briefly the figures I cited a moment ago—$3 million is provided in the 1966 budget for system studies, $24 million is provided for propulsion, and $12 million for avionics. But those in the Air Force who know tell me that they do not understand that this is in any way earmarked for a new bomber system or that such a system has been approved by the Secretary of Defense.
I hope that in our hearings, and in the process of considering the budget, we can get a promise to earmark an adequate amount for a new manned bomber system. Then we can put in such additional amounts as we find necessary far other weapons and other airplanes. Certainly, some of the technology applicable to an advanced manned bomber—such as propulsion and avionics—is also applicable to other aircraft. But we ought to make a start now on a bomber system.
As I have said, I think this matter ought to be brought up early this year and discussed fully. I hope Mr. McNamara will be able to assure us in the hearings that he will give a green light to a new bomber system and that adequate funds will be made available for this purpose if they are appropriated by the Congress.
PRESIDENTIAL AND VICE-PRESIDENTIAL SUCCESSION—PRESI-DENTIAL DISABILITY
The Senate resumed the consideration of the joint resolution (S.J. Res. 1) proposing an amendment to the Constitution of the United States relating to succession to the Presidency and Vice-Presidency and to cases where the President is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office.
Mr. BAYH. Mr. President, I wish to yield to the distinguished Senator from Hawaii [Mr. Foxe].
Mr. FONG. Mr. President, as a cosponsor of Senate Joint Resolution 1 and as a member of the Judiciary Subcommittee on Constitutional Amendments, I should like to compliment and highly commend the distinguished junior Senator from Indiana for his dedication, hard work, diligence, and constant effort in drafting and guiding this critically important legislation through the subcommittee and the Judiciary Committee.
3262	CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE	February 19, 1965
The Senator from Indiana has certainly done yeoman service in this regard and has given the subject long, deep, and scholarly thought. He has listened with great patience to the advice and counsel of the country's outstanding political scientists and other leading experts in this matter. He has forged a proposal from these considerable resources and has produced an outstanding document that is a practical and workable solution to the problems of presidential disability and vice-presidential vacancies.
The joint resolution before us is therefore a product of considerable thought and effort and represents a consensus of many proposals.
Two years ago, the tragic assassination of President Kennedy pointed up once again the urgent need to resolve these two critical gaps in the U.S. Constitution.
First. The Constitution does not say anything about what should be done when there is no Vice President. No one in America today doubts that the Vice President of the United States today carries very vital functions of our Government.
He is the President's personal representative and emissary; he is a member of the Cabinet; Chairman of the National Aeronautics and Space Council; member of the National Security Council; head of the President's Committee on Equal Employment Opportunity; and he takes part in other top-level discussions which lead to national policymaking decisions.
The modem trend toward the increasing importance of the Vice-Presidency began with President Franklin D. Roosevelt. President Eisenhower furthered this trend greatly in assigning Vice President Nixon many duties of critical importance, and President Johnson has made it very clear that he intends to make it an even more important office.
Ever since Vice President John Tyler took over the Presidency in 1841, when President William Henry Harrison died, this precedent has been confirmed on seven occasions. Vice Presidents Fill-more, Andrew Johnson, Arthur, Theodore Roosevelt, Coolidge, Truman, and Lyndon Johnson all became President in this manner.
Besides his many duties, the Vice President is the man who is only a heartbeat away from the world's most powerful office.
Yet, on 16 different occasions in our history the Nation has been without a Vice President.
The security of our Nation demands that the office of the Vice President should never be left vacant for long, such as it was between November 22, 1963, and January 20,1965.
Second. The Constitution does not say anything about what should be done when the President becomes disabled,
how and who determines his disability, when the disability starts, when it ends,
who determines his fitness to resume his office, and who should take over during the period of disability.
In short, there is no orderly constitutional procedure to decide how the awe some and urgent responsibility of the Presidency should be carried on.
Third. The Constitution also is unclear as to whether the Vice President would become President, or whether he becomes only the Acting President, if the President is unable to carry out the duties of his office.
These are very closely related problems, since they involve the devolution and orderly transition of power in times of crisis.
Mr. President, as a member of the Subcommittee on Constitutional Amendments, I have studied very carefully all the various proposals submitted by other Senators during the 88th Congress and in this current session of the 89th Congress. I have considered the testimony submitted to the subcommittee in previous hearings, including those of the distinguished experts who have testified. I have read the data collected and have read the research done by the subcommittee's staff.
I believe that any measure to resolve these very complex and perplexing problems must satisfy at least four requirements:
First. It must have the highest and most authoritative legal sanction. It must be embodied in an amendment to the Constitution.
Second. It must assure prompt action when required to meet a national crisis.
Third. It must conform to the constitutional principle of separation of powers.
Fourth. It must provide safeguards against usurpation of power.
I believe Senate Joint Resolution 1 best meets each of these requirements.
Senate Joint Resolution 1 deals with each of the problems of vice-presidential vacancy and presidential inability by constitutional amendment rather than by statute.
Mr. President, on this legal controversy, well-known legal authorities have argued persuasively on both sides of this question. At issue is the interpretation of the "necessary and proper" authority of article I, section 8, clause 18—Does Congress have the power to legislate with respect to the question of vacancy and inability?
Recently there appears to have been a strong shift of opinion favoring a constitutional amendment over the statutory approach. Two past Attorneys Gen-eral—Herbert Brownell and William Rogers—and the present Attorney General Nicholas Katzenbach, the American Bar Association, and many other State and local bar associations say a constitutional amendment is necessary.
The most persuasive argument for an amendment is that so many legal questions have been raised about the authority of Congress to act on these subjects, that any statute on these subjects would be open to criticism and challenge at the most critical time—when a President dies in office; when a President had become disabled; and when a President sought to recover his office.
We must not gamble with the constitutional legitimacy of our Nation's
executive branch. When a President or Vice President of the United States assumes his office, the entire Nation and the world must know without doubt that he does so as a matter of right. Only a constitutional amendment can supply this necessary legitimacy.
With respect to the problem of vice-presidential vacancies, Senate Joint Resolution 1 provides for the selection of a new Vice President when the former Vice President succeeds to the Presidency within 30 days of his accession to office; the selection is to be made by the President, upon confirmation by a majority vote of both Houses of Congress. I believe this is sound.
The vice-presidential office, under our system of government, is tied very closely with the Presidency. The extent to which the President takes the Vice President into his confidence or shares with him the deliberations leading to executive decisions is largely determined by the President.
Another important reason for allowing the President to nominate a Vice President is that the close relationship between the President and Vice President will permit the person next in line to become familiar with the problems he will face should he be called on to assume the Presidency.
Mr. SALTONSTALL. Mr. President, will the Senator yield?
Mr. FONG. I yield.
Mr. SALTONSTALL. Is it not also true that a Presidential nomination of a Vice President to succeed him should presumably be of one of the same party as the President?
Mr. FONG. Yes. The President must work closely with the Vice President. He is a very close confidant of the President. The Vice President would succeed the President, and he should be of the same political party.
Mr. SALTONSTALL. And, therefore, the President should nominate him?
Mr. FONG. And, therefore, the President should nominate him, and the Congress should have the right to confirm his nomination by a majority vote. Senate Joint Resolution 1 provides precisely these points.
The bill proposes what I believe to be a practical solution to a practical problem.
With respect to the problem of presidential disability, Senate Joint Resolution 1 makes clear that when the President is disabled, the Vice President becomes Acting President for the period of disability. It provides that the President may himself declare his inability and that if he does not, the declaration may be made by the Vice President with written concurrence of a majority of the Cabinet.
The determination of presidential inability by the Cabinet—along with the Vice President—is sound. It is reason-
able to assume that persons the President selects as Cabinet officers are the Presi-
dent's most devoted and loyal supporters who would naturally wish his continuance as President.
The Vice President and the Cabinet are a close-working unit, having a daily
relationship with the President. They are in the past position to assess the President's capacity to perform his duties and functions.
FebrUCtry 19, 1965	CONGRESSIONAL RECORD - SENATE	3263
In addition, a majority of the Cabinet usually are members of the President's political party. They would be the last to declare his inability to carry out the duties of his office if he were able to do so.
Senate Joint Resolution 1 provides that the President may declare his own fitness to resume his powers and duties, but if his ability is questioned, the Cabinet by majority vote and the Congress by a two-thirds vote of both Houses resolve the dispute.
These provisions of Senate Joint Resolution 1 not only achieve the goals I outlined earlier, but they are also in consonance with the most valued principles established by our Founding Fathers in the Constitution.
They observe the principle of the separation of powers in our Government. They effectively maintain the delicate balance of powers among the three branches of our Government. Most important of all, they insure that our Nation's sovereignty is preserved in the hands of the people through their elected representatives in the National Legislature.
Several amendments to Senate Joint Resolution 1 have been proposed which in substance place back into the hands of the Congress many of the problems we have been discussing.
It is my considered judgment that these amendments will serve only to leave these critical questions unan-swered—and we would not have accomplished what we intended to accomplish under Senate Joint Resolution 1.
I believe that these amendments should be voted down.
Mr. President, this is the first time since 1956, when a full-scale congressional study of the problems was conducted, that wide agreement has been reached on these vastly complex constitutional problems.
Last September, a measure similar to Senate Joint Resolution 1 was passed by the Senate by the overwhelming vote of 65 to 0. It was sent to the House, but Congress adjourned before any further action could be taken.
Last January, at the call of the American Bar Association, a dozen of the Nation's leading legal authorities meeting in Washington came up with a consensus, which is essentially embodied in the provisions of Senate Joint Resolution 1. This consensus was subsequently endorsed by the ABA house of delegates.
I understand that Senate Joint Resolution 1 is being cosponsored by a byparti-san group of 77 Senators.
I am most delighted and pleased to cosponsor this proposal with the very distinguished and able junior Senator from Indiana [Senator Balm]. As one who has worked closely with him on this joint resolution, I know that he has worked hard to draft and guide it through the Subcommittee on Constitutional Amendments and the full Judiciary Committee.
Mr. President, I highly commend Senate Joint Resolution 1 to the Senate as a Meritorious measure that should be enacted promptly into law.
Mr. SALTONSTALL. Mr. President, Will the Senator from Hawaii yield?
The PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. MONTOYA in the chair) . Does the Senator from Hawaii yield to the Senator from Massachusetts?
Mr. FONG. I am glad to yield to the Senator from Massachusetts.
Mr. SALTONSTALL. What the Senator has said in substance is that Con-
gress should act now on this subject, that it should act by constitutional amendment, and that the constitutional amendment should be specific in its terms rather than general, in order to leave future actions to future Congresses to supplement it.
Mr. FONG. The Senator is correct. We have been working on these problems for a long time, but have not been able to come up with a substantively sound proposal. Now, we have such a proposal in Senate Joint Resolution 1, which is specific in its terms, in order to leave no doubt as to the devolution and orderly transition of power, and the constitutional legitimacy of our Government. I believe that the various amendments which have been proposed to give the Congress statutory power to act on these problems will only lead us back to where we started.
The resolution of these problems are much too critical to leave for future statutory action, and, like the problem of presidential succession, be the subject of political decision.
I believe that we should pass Senate Joint Resolution 1 now, because it is statesmanlike and the very best possible solution to critical problems and will specifically deal with the problem as we wish it to be dealt with.
Mr. SALTONSTALL. The Senator would deal with the problem by a constitutional amendment rather than by statute.
Mr. FONG. The Senator is correct. That is the consensus of all the experts. Mr. BAYH. Mr. President—
The PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. HARRIS in the chair) . The Senator from Indiana.
Mr. BAYH. Mr. President, I compliment the Senator from Hawaii [Mr. Fos's] on his well-defined statement, in which he covered all the principal points, and in which he stressed the need for the Senate to join behind the consensus of the experts, feeling that we have the best proposal before the Senate now, and that if we spend more time searching for that which is perfect it will become a search for the impossible. We are solving the two key problems which have confronted us—namely, vice-presidential vacancies and the disability of a President; and if we solve these two problems, we can solve the other problems at a later date.
I compliment the Senator and thank him for the cooperation he has given the subcommittee, as well as for the personal sacrifice he made to be in the Chamber this afternoon to participate in this debate.
Mr. FONG. I thank the Senator from Indiana. He has been working hard on this measure. it is through his dedication that the joint resolution is now before the Senate. This has not been an easy resolution to arrive at. The Senator from Indiana and the other members of the committee have worked very hard on it. They have given it deep thought. We
have listened to the experts on the subject, and this is the best possible solution that we can suggest. I believe that it is a completely workable and practical solution to the two key problems.
Mr. SCOTT. Mr. President, will the Senator from Hawaii yield?
Mr. FONG. I yield.
Mr. SCOTT. Mr. President, I rise in support of Senate Joint Resolution 1, but first, I commend the distinguished Senator from Hawaii for the fine presentation he has made, and for the scholarship which is evident in his exposition.
Let me say, for my part, that I shall support the proposed Dirksen substitute for Senate Joint Resolution 1 because I believe it to be simpler, wiser, and more farsighted on a. long-range basis to leave to Congress the discretion to prescribe, by statute, procedures for the transfer of the President's powers and duties in the case of presidential inability.
It occurs to me that one illustration as to why Senate Joint 1 should leave this discretion to Congress is that there is no provision in Senate Joint Resolution 1, as reported to the Senate, that deals with the inability of a Vice President to perform his duties. If a Vice President dies or resigns, there is a provision for filling the vacancy. Let us suppose, however, that the Vice President suffers from an inability. It would be rather awkward, it seems to me, to overburden the Constitution with procedural details, better and more flexibly prescribed by statute, in an effort to foresee and imagine every possible eventuality and to meet every conceivable contingency.
Yet, with the increased importance of the office of Vice President, the contingency of the Vice President's inability becomes a significant consideration and Congress could take care of it by law, as it would be permitted to do under the broader language of the Dirk-sen amendment.
I am an original cosponsor of Senate Joint Resolution 1, but subsequent study of the Judiciary Committee's hearings and report, particularly the views expressed therein by my distinguished minority leader, has persuaded me to accept the Dirksen amendment.
However, if the Dirksen amendment should not be adopted, I revert, then, to my desire to see a workable proposal adopted, one which will be at least as wisely considered and prepared as Senate Joint Resolution 1, sponsored by the distinguished Senator from Indiana [Mr. BAYH]. I would, then, as a cosponsor, support Senate Joint Resolution 1.
Mr. President, the tragedy which this Nation witnessed only 15 months ago brought most forcefully to our attention once again the striking absence in the Constitution of appropriate provision for continuity of presidential leadership. In this era of recurring crises at home and abroad, it is imperative that at no time should there be any doubt in anyone's mind as to who is exercising the powers and duties of the Presidency. That is the central issue we are
3264	CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE	February 19, 1965
dealing with today in Senate Joint Resolution 1.
This measure, of which I am honored to be a cosponsor, provides a workable means of assuring continuity of presidential leadership. It recognizes the very distinct nature of the two exigen-cies—death and inability—under which the Nation may lose the leadership of its President, and it provides suitable solutions for each of these peculiarly different situations.
The uncertainty concerning the legitimacy of our traditional method of providing for presidential succession, which is prompted by the existing vague constitutional language, would be removed. The addition of language providing for the filling of vacancies in the office of the Vice President, which occur upon the death, resignation, or removal of the President, would assure the Nation that it will always have a Vice President ready and able to assume the office of President or exercise the powers and duties of that office should the occasion arise.
Provision of continuity of presidential leadership is an urgent need that must be met now. There is widespread support for Senate Joint Resolution 1, and the climate for early ratification of this measure by the States seems to be favorable. Let us therefore promptly approve it.
Before closing, Mr. President, let me heartily commend the junior Senator from Indiana for his thorough study and diligent efforts in drafting Senate Joint Resolution 1, and for bringing it to the floor of the Senate. And I thank the Senator from Hawaii for giving me this opportunity to express my views.
Mr. FONG. I thank the Senator for his compliments. In answer to his questions, let me say that the Dirksen amendment would leave us almost in the same position as that from which we started. Many questions will still remain unanswered. If something should happen to the Vice President, we would not have the answer to that problem. It does not militate against Senate Joint Resolution 1. At present, no one succeeds to the position of Vice President if a Vice President succeeds to the office of President. I believe that if we take one step at a time, we shall accomplish what we are trying to accomplish. I believe that the present resolution is workable and practical
CONSTri u IONAL RIGHTS OF
ALL AMERICANS
Mr. EASTLAND. Mr. President, in 1954, soon after the decision in Brown against Topeka, I made the statement that it was impossible to fulfill the implications of Brown against Topeka without destroying the constitutional rights of all other American citizens and all other rights embodied in the Constitution and guaranteed to the people.
Acting under the contemporary and current insanity in the country relating to so-called civil rights, various bureaus are issuing edicts and decrees without any justification in law which deprive the American people of their basic rights.
The Department of Defense under Secretary McNamara, together with certain underlings, has probably been the most zealous of these department heads in issuing decrees irrespective of the rights of the American citizens. I wish to read to the Senate a letter which I have just received from Hon. Perry S. Ransom, Jr., of Ocean Springs, Miss., to show to the Senate how far these Government bureaus have gone in surrendering basic rights to the current insanity of the country:
PERRY S. RANSOM, JR., CONSULTING ENGINEER,
Ocean Springs, Miss., February 16, 1965. Senator JAMES 0. EASTLAND,
U.S. Senate,
Washington, D.C.
DEAR SIR: Realizing full well the large volume of mail that you receive daily from the people you represent and the futility of individual correspondence, I nevertheless feel compelled to write. Under our system of democratic government we claim the right of the individual citizen to protest when we feel the Federal Government exceeds the limitations set forth by our Constitution.
For my explicit protest the following facts are herewith submitted:
The Jackson County Baptist Association is currently conducting in numerous Baptist Churches a school of missions, whereby missionaries come to our churches and relate to us the work that is being done for the Lord on local and foreign fields. Through this mission emphasis our Christian people are made aware of just what our denomination is doing to fulfill our Lord's great commission to "go and teach unto all nations." One of our scheduled missionary speakers was to be a Sergeant Fuller (first name, serial number, and specific assignment unknown to me), who is currently stationed at Keesler AFB in Biloxi, Miss. Our association has now been informed that said Sergeant Fuller has received orders from his superiors in the Air Force that he is not to speak in our church as the audience is segregated. Row can the first amendment which guarantees the complete separation of church and state be ignored by the military in prohibiting this man from exercising his religious beliefs by speaking to a local Baptist Church group because there are no Negroes in the audience? To the best of my knowledge the Baptist Negroes of Ocean Springs are completely satisfied and happy in their own church and have no desire to attend our church. Can it be that the Government will attempt to compel the Negroes to integrate our churches, or can not the Great Society leave a soul's salvation to the individual and to the Lord?
To reiterate, I, as an individual citizen strongly protest the actions of the military at Keesler AFB to prevent any American citizen from exercising his religious beliefs just because he happens to be in the Air Force.
Any actions that you may be able to make to rectify this situation are endorsed and encouraged.
Yours very truly,
PERRY S. RANSOM, Jr.,
One American Citizen.
In other words, a sergeant in the U.S. Air Force, who happens to be a religious person, was invited to address on a. religious subject other Americans who belonged to his religious sect. Because the meeting of this sect was not integrated, Sergeant Fuller of the 'U.S. Air Force was deprived of his right of free speech. The religious association was deprived of their religious liberty. Freedom of assembly was likewise violated.
Mr. President, I bring this to the at.. tention of the Congress in order that the Congress may know just how far the insanity of the country has progressed and the insanity of the bureaus Which are administering the laws under the Constitution of the United States,
Mr. President, this brings me to ask the Secretary of Defense one question: If Sergeant Fuller can be prohibited from attending a Baptist church in Ocean Springs, Miss., to make a few remarks, then can the Secretary of Defense prohibit Sergeant Fuller from attending that Baptist church in Ocean Springs?
I do not expect that Sergeant Fuller's troubles or the troubles of the Baptist Church at Ocean Springs, Miss., will attract the wrath of either the National Council of Churches or the Civil Liberties Union, but I do think the country might be interested in the subject matter if they are apprised of it.
PRESIDENTIAL AND VICE-PRESI-
DENTIAL SUCCESSION—PRESI-DENTIAL DISABILITY
The Senate resumed the consideration of the joint resolution (S.J. Res. 1) proposing an amendment to the Constitution of the United States relating to succession to the Presidency and Vice-Presidency and to cases where the President is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office.
UNANIMOUS-CONSENT AGREEMENT
Mr. 1VIANSF1h,LD. Mr. President, I am about to propound a unanimous-consent request.
I ask unanimous consent that 1 hour for debate be allowed on the Dirksen substitute, to be equally divided between the sponsors of the substitute and the Senator in charge of the joint resolution on the floor of the Senate, the Senator from Indiana [Mr. BAYHl ; that an hour for debate be allowed on each amendment, the time to be divided between the sponsors of the amendment and the Senator from Indiana [Mr. BAYFIl ; and that 2 hours for debate be allowed on the joint resolution, to be equally divided.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Is there objection? The Chair hears none, and it is so ordered.
The unanimous-consent agreement, subsequently reduced to writing, is as follows:
UNANIMOUS-CONSENT AGREEMENT
Ordered, That the further consideration of the Joint resolution (S.J. Res. 1) , proposing an amendment to the Constitution of the United States relating to succession to the Presidency and Vice-Presidency and to cases were the President is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office, debate on any amendment, motion, or appeal, except a motion to lay on the table, shall be limited to 1 hour, to be equally divided and controlled by the mover of any such amendment or
motion and the Senator from Indiana !Mr. BAT-a] : Provided, That in the event the Sen-
ator from Indiana is in favor of any such amendment or motion, the time in opposition thereto shall be controlled by the minority leader or some Senator designated by him.
Ordered further, That on the question of the final passage of the said joint resolution, debate shall be limited to 2 hours, to be
February 19, 1965	CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE	3265
equally divided and controlled, respectively, by the majority and minority leaders: Provided, That the said leaders, or either of them, may, from the time under their control on the passage of the said joint resolution, allot additional time to any Senator during the consideration of any amendment, Motion, or appeal.
Mr. DIRKSEN. Mr. President, I yield 5 minutes to the Senator from Kansas.
Mr. CARLSON. Mr. President, in my opinion, one of the most important pieces of legislation to be considered by this session of Congress is the pending joint resolution regarding presidential succession and presidential disability.
I commend the distinguished Senator from Indiana [Mr. BAYH] and the members of the subcommittee of the Judiciary Committee and the Judiciary Committee for having devoted so much time to the hearings and the preparation of the joint resolution.
For the best part of two centuries, the Congress of the United States has not dealt effectively with the dual problems of vice-presidential vacancies and presidential disabilities. Sixteen times, over a period in excess of 37 years, this Nation has been without a Vice President. President Garfield lay for 80 days unable to perform the powers and duties of his office—President Wilson was disabled for 16 months—President Eisenhower had three serious disabilities. Fortunately, the country was not confronted by an international crisis during any of these periods. We must not take for granted that history will continue to treat us so kindly.
Over the years, Congress has studied these dual problems at great length. The main reasons for the lack of solution are the inability to arrive at a consensus and the unwillingness of individual Members of Congress to amend their own personal views in order to arrive at a workable plan which could receive two-thirds vote in each House of Congress. A great deal of effort has gone into the consensus embodied in Senate Joint Resolution 1--the American Bar Association, the Committee on Economic Development, legal scholars, constitutional lawyers and members of the executive and legislative branches of the Government have worked together to develop a workable solution.
The main problem confronting Congress is writing a constitutional provision which would assure no break in the exercise of the presidential power. More than that, no doubt should be permitted to arise as to who holds the office.
In addition to these two requirements, the procedure for transferring of power should be fast, efficient, and easily understood.
The Senate Judiciary Committee has spent days taking testimony of able and qualified individuals, discussing every phase of this subject.
From the beginning of our Nation, we have been without a Vice President in excess of 20 percent of the time.
The preponderance of testimony has declared that these problems must be
solved by constitutional amendment.
They are of sufficient importance to our country to be embedded in the bedrock
law of the land—the Constitution. Some of those supporting this contention have been President Lyndon Johnson, Vice President HUBERT HUMPHREY, former President Dwight Eisenhower, Attorney General Nicholas Katzenbach, former Attorney General Herbert Brownell, former Attorney General William Rogers, the American Bar Association's House of Delegates by a unanimous vote, president of the American Bar Association, Lewis Powell, and immediate past president of the American Bar Association, Walter Craig.
Opinion is divided as to whether Congress has authority to deal with the problem of disability. Any statute dealing with this problem would be subjected to constitutional challenge in the courts at a time of grave national crisis when action and certainty, not inaction and doubt, were demanded by the national interest.
Sections 3 and 4 of this joint resolution deal with the very difficult problem of Presidential disability.
Section 3 enables the President to declare his own disability to perform the powers and duties of his office and the Vice President to assume these powers and duties as Acting President. This provides for the eventuality that the President may be undergoing a serious operation or he himself feels seriously ill and feels that the best interests of the country dictate that he voluntarily should turn over the powers and duties of the Presidency to the Vice President for the tenure of the President's disability.
Section 4 provides that, if the President is unable to declare his own disability, the Vice President and the majority of the Cabinet may do so, and the Vice President would assume the Powers and duties as Acting President for the tenure of the President's disability. Thus, the country would be protected under such circumstances as a Presidential heart attack, which finds the Nation's Chief Executive under an oxygen tent when an effort is made to return missiles to Cuba.
The Vice President has the constitutional responsibility to act and the Cabinet, appointed by the President, serves as a sufficient protection against a power-hungry Vice President.
It is impossible for Congress to foresee every eventuality that could incapacitate the President or his successors. Congress can, however, and I believe should, make every effort to remove the anxiety and apprehension that arises out of the uncertainties of the present law.
Mr. BAYH. Mr. President, will the Senator yield?
Mr. CARLSON. I yield.
Mr. BAYH. I compliment the Senator from Kansas on his statement, particularly the emphasis he placed on the fact that there has been much give and take, and that this is as close as we are likely to come to being able to nail down a final determination. The time for us to act has come. If we continue to postpone this issue, we shall get further and further away from the horrible sequence of events which awakened public interest in this subject and it will recede further and further into the past.
The PRESIDING OFFIt-Ert. The time of the Senator has expired.
Mr. CARLSON. Mr. President, I stated at the beginning of my remarks that I felt the proposed legislation was one of the most important measures that would be considered by this session of the Congress. I sincerely hope that action can be taken on it at this session.
Mr. DIRKSEN. Mr. President, I yield myself 15 minutes.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Illinois is recognized for 15 minutes.
Mr. DIRKSEN. I am sensible of the urgency that is involved in connection with the proposal to amend the Constitution. Events in history such as what happened on the 22d of November 1963, the assassination of President Garfield, who signed only a single extradition paper while he lay in a virtual coma for 90 days, and the difficulty that the country encountered at the time President Woodrow Wilson was stricken, have from time to time reenergized this issue. I am quite aware of the desire to have something done and to have it done as quickly as possible.
However, I am rather sensible of an old line in the Book of Exodus:
Thou shalt not follow a multitude to do
evil.
The word "evil" might mean "error," and it can be used in its broadest sense. I believe it has been pretty much of a. rule in our constitutional history that we do not legislate in the Constitution. We try to keep the language simple. We try to keep it at a high level, and we offer some latitude for statutory implementation thereafter, depending upon the events and circumstances that might arise. For that reason I have submitted a substitute, which is extremely short—in fact, a single paragraph—which I believe would encompass the problem that confronts us, would meet virtually every exigency, and would leave in the hands of the Congress whatever legislation might be necessary.
Before I go further, I commend the distinguished Senator from Indiana [Mr. BAYH]. No one has been quite so diligent in pursuing this subject. The same statement can be made concerning the staff. The Senator has worked hard. He is anxious to obtain action in this body; and he hopes to obtain action in the other body so that the constitutional proposal can then go to the country.
The substitute which I have offered has been skeletonized so that there would be no ambiguities. There would be no holes of any kind. If there were, they could always be remedied by congressional enactment. The substitute provides merely that if the President is removed from office, if he dies, or for other reason leaves the office, the office of President shall devolve on the Vice President.
That subject has been controversial ever since Chester A. Arthur came into office, and, for that matter, even at the time William Henry Harrison died in office and was succeeded by a President who at the time was not sure whether or not he should accept the office or only
3266	CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE	February 19, 1965
undertake the duties and the responsibilities. My substitute would make it pretty clear—and I believe it is true also of Senate Joint Resolution 1—that in the case of removal, death, or resignation, the office would devolve on the Vice President. That is very simple, and the language would nail it down.
But in the case of the inability of a President to discharge the powers and duties of the office, the powers and duties would devolve upon the Vice President. For example, the President might be alive. He might be incapacitated and unable to discharge his responsibilities as President. So the office would not devolve upon the Vice President, but merely the powers and duties.
The Vice President would be designated as Acting President, and no more. He would maintain that status until the inability had been removed.
My amendment would further provide that—
The Congress may by law provide for other cases of removal, death, resignation, or inability, of either the President or Vice President—
There might be a situation in which both the President and the Vice President would be disabled. There might be a situation in which the Vice President would be disabled, but the President would be in possession of his faculties and could carry on. In that event the Congress, under the proposed substitute, could enact a law to meet the situation which would arise under those circumstances, and would also be able to declare what officer shall be President or Vice President, in the case of inability, to act as President; and such officer would be or act as President accordingly.
That is rather broad language, but it is designed to be broad. I believe it is in keeping with the language of the Constitution itself.
The amendment contains one other further provision:
The commencement and termination of any inability shall be determined by such method as Congress may by law provide.
The distinction between the substitute and Senate Joint Resolution 1 is that section 4 and section 5 of the joint resolution provide in a little detail, at least, what shall be done when there is an inability, if the President is disabled and is not in a position to declare his inability. Then it would be up to the Vice President and a majority of the principal officers of the executive departments or such other body as Congress may by law provide to transmit to the Congress written declarations that the President was disabled; and the Vice President would immediately assume the powers and duties of the office as acting President.
Mr. President, there might not be a Vice President. How could he then join with the principal officers of the executive departments in transmitting a message to the Congress?
The language of the joint resolution is as follows:
Whenever the Vice President and a majority of the principal officers transmit that message—
But if there is no Vice President, obviously we cannot fulfill the equations that are carried in Senate Joint Resolution 1.
I believe that one could point out some other defects that would give me some cause for concern. For that reason I believe that a measure of the kind proposed should be broadly sketched, and that ample latitude should be left for the Congress to act.
It is said that we must "nail it down" and dispose of the matter forthwith. But if and when the proposal—and I am hopeful that a proposal of some kind will go to the country—is disposed of by Congress, the committees can begin to work at once upon legislation to implement such a constitutional proposal. It could be ready, and all the hearings and details could be disposed of, as soon as the necessary number of States had ratified the amendment. Then it would not require more than a matter of days to enact the necessary implementing legislation, so that no time would be lost. We would always preserve the necessary latitude.
For that reason, I think we ought to proceed on a broader base than we presently contemplate. That must have been in the thinking of the President in connection with his message to Congress on January 28. The President said:
II. VACANCY IN THE OFFICE OF THE VICE PRESIDENT
Indelible personal experience has impressed upon me the indisputable logic and imperative necessity of assuring that the second office of our system shall, like the first office, be at all times occupied by an incumbent who is able and who is ready to assume the powers and duties of the Chief Executive and Commander in Chief.
In our history, to this point, the office of the President has never devolved below the first clearly prescribed step of constitutional succession. In moments of need, there has always been a Vice President; yet, Vice Presidents are no less mortal than Presidents. Seven men have died in the office and one has resigned, in addition to the eight who left the office vacant to succeed to the Presidency.
It is a question whether in the case of succession it would be possible under Senate Joint Resolution 1 to fill that office or not. So it would be something of a departure from what the President said about the indispensable need of having the second office as well as the first office always occupied. With that general proposal, I fully agree.
There are other matters that I might present in connection with the amendment.
I shall submit at this point a general statement on the general subject, and also some questions that have been raised. I ask unanimous consent that they may be printed at this point in the RECORD, together with an article entitled "Bayh Amendment—Second Thoughts on Disability," written by Roscoe Drummond, and published in the Washington Post of recent date.
There being no objection, the statement, questions, and article were ordered to be printed in the REcoap, as follows:
STATEMENT BY SENATOR DIRSSEN
We have before us Senate Joint Resolution 1. It is a proposed amendment to the Constitution to meet the problem of presi dential inability and of vacancies in the office of Vice President.
I commend, the distinguished chairman of the Subcommittee on Constitutional Amend-
ments. He has worked throughout his
period of service on the committee on this problem. He has devoted a tremendous
amount of time and energy to the issue and his work has helped to keep the issue before us.
It is a pressing domestic issue. It is not a new issue by any means. It has been be-
fore the Congress numerous times. It has
been the subject of endless study by legislators, constitutional authorities, and others,
All have sought to provide an answer, but no proposed solution has been found that met the problem. Nonetheless, a solution must be found. We must contrive language that will solve the problem.
There are those who contend that no constitutional amendment is required, that the entire matter can be disposed of by legislation. I do not hold to this view although many distinguished scholars support it. Rather I share with our distinguished subcommittee chairman, our subcommittee, and the full committee, the view that a constitutional amendment is required.
The problem however is this: How do we fashion the amendment? Do we follow the advice of the Attorney General who says:
"Apart from that, the wisdom of loading the Constitution down by writing detailed procedural and substantive provisions into it has been questioned by many scholars and statesmen. The framers of the Constitution saw the wisdom of using broad and expanding concepts and principles that could be adjusted to keep pace with current need."
And do we follow the advice of another noted constitutional scholar, Martin Taylor, chairman of the Committee on Constitutional Law, New York Bar Association, who has been most active in this field and who urged the subcommittee only last year that:
"In the first plan, you have a basic fundamental principle of constitutional law that any amendment should be simple. I am substantially quoting from John Marshall. It should not give detail. You see the error of that in a great many proposals because, as time goes by, there might be great disagreement as to the practicability of applying it under changed circumstances. So the fundamental [principle] that you give broad enabling powers in the Constitution is what you should rely on, changing, if you please, implementation with changing conditions."
That is the view I hold. Keep constitutional amendments simple. Leave the detail to implementing legislation which can be changed to reflect changing circumstances. Leave the Constitution as the basic document from which all authority flows, but do not attempt to detail the application to specific problems in the basic document itself.
And that is the difficulty with Senate Joint Resolution 1 as reported by the full committee with amendments. It was pointed out by the Attorney General when he was before the subcommittee. He said he had difficulty with the amendment. It was necessary for him to make a number of assumptions in regards to the operation of the amendment. This should not be---the amendment should be clear and understandable.
What were the problems that the Attorney General had with the amendment? This is what he said:
"First, I assume that in using the phrase 'majority vote of both Houses of Congress' in section 2, and two-thirds vote of both Houses' in section 5, what is meant is a majority and two-thirds vote, respectively, of those Members in each House present and voting, a quorum being present. This interpretation would be consistent with long-
February 19, 1965	CONGRESSIONAL RECORD - SENATE	3267
standing precedent (see, e.g., Missouri Pac. By. Co. v. Kansas, 248 U.S. 276 (1919) ) .
"Second, I assume that the procedure established by section 5 for restoring the President to the powers and duties of his office is applicable only to instances where the President has been declared disabled without his consent, as provided in section 4; and that, where the President has voluntarily declared himself unable to act, in accordance with the procedure established by section 3, he could restore himself immediately to the powers and duties of his office by declaring in writing that his inability has ended. The subcommittee may wish to consider whether language to insure this interpretation should be added to section 3.
"Third, I assume that even where disability was established originally pursuant to section 4, the President could resume the powers and duties of his Office immediately with the concurrence of the Acting President, and would not be obliged to await the expiration of the 2-day period mentioned in section 5.
"Fourth, I assume that transmission to the Congress of the written declarations referred to in section 5 would, if Congress were not then in session, operate to convene the Congress in special session so that the matter could be immediately resolved. In this regard, section 5 might be construed as Ina-pliedly requiring the Acting President to convene a special session in order to raise an issue as to the President's inability pursuant to section 5.
"Further in this connection, I assume that the language used in section 5 to the effect that Congress "will immediately decide" the issue means that if a decision were not reached by the Congress immediately, the powers and duties of the Office would revert to the President. This construction is sufficiently doubtful, however, and the term "immediately" is sufficiently vague, that the subcommittee may wish to consider adding certainty by including more precise language in section 5 or by taking action looking toward the making of appropriate provision in the rules of the House and Senate.
"In my testimony during the hearings of 1963, I expressed the view that the specific procedures for determining the commencement and termination of the President's inability should not be written into the Constitution, but instead should be left to Congress so that the Constitution would not be encumbered by detail."
Did the action of the full committee in amending Senate Joint Resolution 1 correct the deficiencies pointed out by the Attorney General? Let us consider what he said before the full Judiciary Committee of the other body. He began observing that:
"As the committee well knows, the factual situations with which House Joint Resolution 1 is designed to deal are numerous and complex. Inevitably, therefore, some aspects of the proposal will raise problems of ambiguity for some observers. In order to assist in resolving any such ambiguity, I propose to set forth the interpretations I would make in several difficult areas so that the committee may consider whether clarification is needed."
He then repeated the first observation that he made before our subcommittee regarding his assumption of the meaning of "majority vote." He then repeated his second observation regarding the procedure established by section 5 of Senate Joint Resolution 1, and then added:
"However, I note in this regard that the Senate Committee on the Judiciary has re-
cently approved an amended version of Senate Joint Resolution 1, the counterpart of
House Joint Resloution 1, under which the
President may resume his powers and duties in this situation only by following a pro-
cedure comparable to that established by section 5. I would much prefer a provision which would clearly enable the President to terminate immediately any period of inability he has voluntarily declared."
Re then repeated the third and fourth observations he made to our committee but then made this further observation:
"The Senate Committee on the Judiciary has revised Senate Joint Resolution 1 to provide that all declarations, including the declarations by the President under sections 3 and 5 and the declaration by the Vice President under section 4, shall be transmitted to the President of the Senate and Speaker of the House of Representatives. This change, the committee states, would provide a basis on which congressional leaders could convene Congress if it were not then in session, However, the Constitution expressly authorizes only the President to convene Congress in special session (art. IL sec. 3, clause 2) , and in view of that provision it might be argued that Congress cannot be convened in special session by its own officers. Accordingly, I would think it preferable to provide that the Acting President must convene a special session in order to raise an issue under section 5 as to the President's inability. Although section 5 as it now stands could be construed in that way, the committee may wish to consider whether it would not be advisable to add express language which would make that intention unmistakable.
"Fifth, I assume that the language used in section 5—to the effect that Congress 'will immediately decide' the issue—means that if a decision were not reached by the Congress immediately, the powers and duties of the office would revert to the President. This construction is sufficiently doubtful however, and the term 'immediately' is sufficiently vague, even though used also in article I, section 3, clause 2 of the Constitution, that the committee may wish to consider adding certainty by including more precise language in section 5 or by taking action looking toward the making of approximate provision in the rules of the House and Senate.
"The Senate Judiciary Committee, in approving Senate Joint Resolution 1, has changed the language 'immediately decide the issue' to 'immediately proceed to decide the issue.' This change seems to have the effect of reversing the interpretation I have indicated, the result being that under Senate Joint Resolution 1, as approved by the Senate committee, the Acting President would continue to exercise the powers and duties of the Presidency while Congress considered the matter and until one of the Houses of Congress brought the issue to a vote and failed to support the Acting President by a two-thirds vote.
"I note that the committee has before it several proposals (H.J. Res. 3, H.J. Res. 119, and H.J. Res. 248) which would provide that once the issue of inability was referred to Congress, the President would be automatically restored to the powers and duties of his Office if Congress failed to act within 10 days. These proposals would add a measure of protection for the President against interminable consideration of the issue by Congress. However, it would still be possible under these proposals for the issue to be decided by delay rather than by a vote on the merits.
"In view of the difficulty of establishing in advance exactly what period of consideration would be appropriate, the most effective course might be to initiate promptly the adoption of rules for the consideration of questions of inability that would insure a reasonably prompt vote on the merits. I do feel that, if the issue of national leadership is to be importantly affected by delay, then delay should favor the President. Particularly is this so if the President may not, under section 3, unilaterally declare an immediate end to periods of inability which he has voluntarily declared."
But there is another course open to us. In the 88th Congress a simple and complete amendment was introduced by Senator Ke-fauver, then the chairman of the Constitutional Amendments Subcommittee, and cosponsored by Senator Keating. It was Senate Joint Resolution. 35.
In his appearance before the subcommittee on June 18, 1963, Attorney General Katz-enbach, then the Deputy Attorney General suggested two minor modifications to the amendment. As modified the amendment would read:
"In. the case of the removal of the President from office or of his death or resignation, the said office shall devolve on the Vice President. In case of the inability of the President to discharge the powers and duties of the said office, the said powers and duties shall devolve on the Vice President as Acting President until the inability be removed. The Congress may by law provide for the case of removal, death, resignation, or inability, both of the President and Vice President, declaring what officer shall then be President, or in case of inability, act as President, and such officer shall be or act as President accordingly, until a President shall be elected or, in case of inability, until the inability shall be earlier removed. The commencement and termination of any inability shall be determined by such method as Congress may by law provide."
The Attorney General endorsed the amendment as changed, saying:
"In addition, crucial and urgent new situations may arise in the changing future-not covered by Senate Joint Resolution 28—where it may be of importance that Congress, with the President's approval, should be able to act promptly without being required to resort to still another amendment to the Constitution. Senate Joint Resolution 35 makes this possible; Senate Joint Resolution 28 does not.
"Since it is difficult to foresee all of the possible circumstances in which the Presidential inability problem could arise, we are opposed to any constitutional amendment which attempts to solve all these questions by a series of complex procedures. We think that the best solution to the basic problems that remain would be a simple constitutional amendment, such as Senate Joint Resolution 35, which treats the contingency of inability differently from situations such as death, removal, or resignation, which states that the Vice President in case of Presidential inability succeeds only to the powers and duties of the office as Acting President and not to the office itself, and which declares that the commencement and termination of any inability may be determined by such methods as Congress by law shall provide. Such an amendment would supply the flexibility which we think is indispensable and, at the same time, put to rest what legal problems may exist under the present provisions of the Constitution as supplemented by practice and understanding."
He reaffirmed his support for this amendment in 1964 by submitting his 1963 statement for the record, and, I might say his three predecessors, Attorneys General Brownell, Rogers, and KENNEDY, have also endorsed the amendment. The House of Delegates of the American Bar Association has endorsed that amendment on two separate occasions. The New York State Bar Association reaffirmed its support of such an amendment this very week and it has been supported by the Association of the Bar of the City of New York.
Let me point out that this amendment, as modified, would permit precisely what Sen.-ate Joint Resolution 1 attempts to do but it would reserve the detailed procedure in Senate Joint Resolution 1, which has proved the principal difficulty, for legislation where such details can more properly and easily be defined.
3268	CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE	February 19, 1965
What is the practical difficulty with Senate Joint Resolution 1? It is the questions left unanswered. Must the President wait two days to regain his authority when he has voluntarily relinquished it? If the President is disabled and the Congress is not in session, who calls it into session? Under the Constitution only the President can. What happens if a Vice President, who is serving as Acting President, became disabled himself?
Then, too, if the method of filling a vacancy in the office of Vice President proves unworkable, would it not be preferable to change the procedure by legislation rather than by another constitutional amendment as Senate Joint Resolution 1 requires?
These are but a few of the questions that come to mind as I study this amendment. Consider the problems that the State legislatures will have. Who will be present to answer the questions of the members of the legislature concerning the mechanics of all of these details? Wouldn't the simpler amendment which merely clarifies the present Constitution and leaves the details to be legislated be far preferable and more easily understood?
I recite a number of questions that occur to me in connection with Senate Joint Resolution 1:
1. Where in section 5 is there any language limiting it to those instances where the Vice President and a majority of the heads of the executive department have declared the President unable to discharge the powers and duties of office?
2. If there is no such language, should there be?
3. Must the President wait 2 days to see if the Vice President files a declaration that the President is still under a disability before recovering his office even though he had voluntarily relinquished it?
4. One of the purposes of Senate Joint Resolution 1 is to permit the President to declare his own inability with the assurance that he can immediately regain it upon the termination of inability. Would the complicated procedure contained in Senate Joint Resolution 1 for regaining the office make it highly unlikely that a President would use it in most cases?
5. If a President were physically unable to write or even sign his name, how could he make a written declaration of his own inability?
6. Another purpose of Senate Joint Resolution 1 is to make certain that the offices of President and Vice President are filled at all times. Testimony before the committee indicated the urgency of this. The national security was involved, it was said. The President in his message to Congress on January 28, 1965, said:
"Indelible personal experience has impressed upon me the indisputable logic and imperative necessity of assuring that the second office of our system shall, like the first office, be at all times occupied by an incumbent who is able and who is ready to assume the powers and duties of the Chief Executive and Commander in Chief."
7. Does Senate Joint Resolution 1 make provision for having the offices filled at all times?
8. Suppose the President becomes disabled and the Vice President becomes Acting President. Where is the provision for filling the office of Vice President?
9. What happens if the Vice President is under a disability when the President becomes disabled?
10. The Constitution says that only the President can call Congress into special session. What happens if Congress is not in session when the Vice President and a majority of the heads of the executive departments declare the President unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office? How is Congress called into session to discharge its function under section 5?
11. If the method of filling a vacancy in the office of Vice President as provided in Senate Joint Resolution 1, proves unworkable or undesirable, wouldn't it be preferable to be able to change it by legislation rather than by another constitutional amendment as required by Senate Joint Resolution 1?
BAYH AMENDMENT—SECOND THOUGHTS ON
DISABILITY
(By Roscoe Drummond)
Some influential Senators are having second thoughts on the wisdom of the Bayh amendment as a means of dealing with Presidential disability, not on the urgency of the action. And there is no acute dissent on what should be done, only on how it should be done.
The how is important. It could be crucially important.
The second thoughts, which are growing on the Hill, have to do with whether to write detailed procedures into the Constitution to try to cover all contingencies or to propose a simple amendment that would authorize Congress to deal with these matters.
Senator EVERETT M. DIRKSEN, of Illinois, the Democratic Senator EUGENE MCCARTHY, of Minnesota, have come out on the side of a simple enabling amendment. Other Senators, both Republican and Democratic, have indicated either their support or their open-mindedness.
There is a strong case to be made in favor of an authorizing amendment without attempting to write detailed law into the Constitution.
The role of the Constitution is to distribute authority between the three branches of the Government and between the Federal Government and the States. Its function is not to prescribe in detail how that authority shall be used. Since Congress does not have the power to deal with Presidential disability and Vice Presidential vacancies, the only need is to give Congress that power.
Amendment to the Constitution should not legislate. Good precedent: The 16th amendment, which gave Congress authority to "lay and collect taxes on incomes." It did not attempt to write a tax code. Bad precedent: The 18th amendment, which wrote the prohibition law into the Constitution and made repeal of the amendment the only redress when it did not work.
Can't we profit from the experience of the 18th amendment, or must we repeat it all over again? It seems to me once is enough.
What if we write into an amendment all the precise procedures for filling Vice Presidential vacancies, and coping with Presidential disability? And then later we find contingencies nobody foresaw? Or what if some major provision proves inadequate? Then the amending process would have to start all over again.
These are practical questions. For example, one proposal to go into a possible amendment would leave it wholly with the President to affirm that he has recovered from a disability. But what if he insists upon exercising his powers when he is unable to do so It has happened twice. President Garfield lingered for 80 days between life and death, disabled but unwilling to accept his disability at any time. The same with President Wilson for 17 months.
The voluntary arrangements established by Presidents Eisenhower, Kennedy, and Johnson with their Vice Presidents suggest that this fearful hoarding of power might not be repeated. But we cannot be sure that some future President, after being disabled, would not seek to recapture his authority before he was ready. One proposed amendment would leave this matter unresolved.
Congress cannot possibly foresee every contingency. That is why it seems to me that Senator DIRKSEN and Senator MCCARTHY are wise in urging that detailed methods not be embedded into the Constitution and that instead, the necessary authority be granted to Congress to act.
Mr. DIRKSEN. Mr. President, where, for instance, in section 5 is there any language limiting that section to instances in which the Vice President and a majority of the heads of the executive departments have declared the President to be unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office? If there is no such language, should there be?
Must the President wait 2 days to see if the Vice President files a declaration that the President is still under a disability before recovering his office, even though he had voluntarily relinquished it?
One of the purposes of Senate Joint Resolution 1 is to permit the President to declare his own inability, with the assurance that he can immediately regain it upon the termination of such inability. Would the complicated procedure contained in Senate Joint Resolution 1 for regaining the office make it highly unlikely that a President would use it in most cases?
If a President were physically unable to write or even sign his name, how could he make a written declaration of his own inability?
Another purpose of Senate Joint Resolution 1 is to make certain that the Offices of President and Vice President are filled at all times. Testimony before the committee indicated the urgency of this matter, and that is the reason why I recited the extended paragraph from the President's message to Congress.
Does Senate Joint Resolution 1 make provision for having the offices filled at all times?
The PRESIDING OrriCER (Mr. Ty-DINGS in the chair) . The 15 minutes yielded to himself by the Senator from Illinois have expired.
Mr. DIRKSEN. I yield myself 2 additional minutes.
Suppose the President becomes disabled and the Vice President becomes Acting President. Where is the provision for filling the office of Vice President?
What happens if the Vice President is under a disability when the President becomes disabled?
The Constitution provides that only the President may call Congress into special session. What happens if Congress is not in session when the Vice President and a majority of the heads of the executive departments declare the President unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office? How would Congress be called into session to discharge its function under section 5?
If the method of filling a vacancy in the office of Vice President, as provided in Senate Joint Resolution 1, proves unworkable or undesirable, would it not be preferable to be able to change it by legislation rather than by another con-, stitutional amendment, as required by Senate Joint Resolution 1?
Mr. President, those are some of the questions that arise. My interest is that there be no ambiguities and no rigidities
February 19, 1965	CONGRESSIONAL RECORD - SENATE	3269
written into the Constitution that could be modified only by another constitutional amendment.
My preference is for flexibility and for adequate powers in the hands of Congress to deal with the problem. I am sensible of the fact that something must be done. I am glad that the distinguished Senator from Indiana [Mr. BATE] has carried the proposal to this point. For aught I know, my name may be on the joint resolution. Certain it is that I voted for the proposal in the previous Congress, but always with the reservation that proposals that might be Made after the measure had left the committee could without prejudice be submitted on the floor of the Senate. So I exercise only the reservation that I kept unto myself both in the subcommittee and in the full committee, because I wanted to see some measure come to the floor of the Senate upon which the Senate could work its will and get it to the other body, and finally to the country.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The additional time yielded to himself by the Senator from Illinois has expired.
Mr. DIRKSEN. Mr. President, I yield 5 minutes to the distinguished Senator from Nebraska.
Mr. HRUSKA. Mr. President, in the discussion and consideration of the joint resolution, both in the present session of Congress and earlier, there were two principles that I felt were most important. One of those points was just emphasized by the Senator from Illinois, when he spoke in favor of his substitute measure, namely, the inadvisability placing too many detailed procedural provisions in the Constitution.
This makes the Constitution very inflexible. Flexibility is a principle which has been inherent in our Constitution. It has been followed quite. consistently. Exceptions to it are very few indeed.
I fear that with the great number of procedural provisions found in the Senate joint resolution, as reported by the committee, we shall very likely, if we are ever called upon to exercise it, run into something that will prove unworkable. For that reason, it would be better to couch the proposed amendment in general terms and then provide that Congress shall be empowered to implement, by the legislative process, the amendment.
There are two ways of doing it. One would be the substitute resolution of the Senator from Illinois. The other is proposed in the amendment offered by the Senator from Vermont on behalf of the Senator from Kentucky [Mr.
COOPER] .
The latter method would grant to Congress the power to prescribe any other plan for dealing with disability, in the choice of a Vice President and the filling of a vacancy in addition to that detailed in Senate Joint Resolution 1.
That is one of the principles. The other principle is the matter of separation of power. We have had testimony, throughout the past 6 or 8 years, that it is desirable for an amendment dealing with this subject to respect the doctrine of separation of powers. It has been' my view that that doctrine is violated in the resolution as approved by the Committee on the Judiciary, since the decision as to whether or not disability has terminated is left for Congress.
When we ask another branch of the Government for the decision, the doctrine of separation of powers is violated. That was debated thoroughly. The Senator from Indiana has developed a fine body of testimony which is contrary to that viewpoint.
It is, however, a viewpoint that was at one time the judgment of our present Attorney General, three of his predecessors, as nearly as I remember.
As' I have indicated in my individual views of the committee report, it is my view we should abide by these two principles. The substitute amendment of the Senator from Illinois complies with those two principles.
The PRESIDING OFFICER,. The time of the Senator has expired.
Mr. BAYH. Mr. President, I yield 5 minutes to the Senator from North Carolina, or as much time as he may care to use in the opposition to the Dirksen amendment.
The PRESIDING OrVICER. The Senator from North Carolina is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. ERVIN. Mr. President, I rise in opposition to the Dirksen amendment. The Dirksen amendment totally ignores one of the crucial questions which has brought this matter to the floor of the Senate. That is the fact that vacancies occur in the office of Vice President.
The Dirksen amendment makes no attempt to provide for the election of a Vice President in case a Vice President succeeds to the office of President, or is removed from office by impeachment. It ignores one of the things which has made this question so crucial. It ignores the necessity of having someone continue in the office of Vice President.
There is another fatal flaw in the Dirksen amendment. That is the provision that "the commencement and termination of any inability shall be determined by such method as Congress may by law provide."
I thank God that was not placed in the Constitution when the Constitution was adopted. If it had been placed in the Constitution, we would have seen, in the most tragic period of our history, the total blackout of government of the people, by the people, and for the people in this Nation. I refer to the tragic days when a congressional group was trying to take complete power in this Nation. The group was led by the then Senator Ben Wade, who was President pro tern-pore of the Senate and who wanted to be President. At that time there was no Vice President. Lincoln had been assassinated and had been succeeded in the office of President by Vice President Andrew Johnson.
This group in Congress had intimidated the Supreme Court of the United States after that Court had handed down one or two courageous decisions. The group scared the Supreme Court so that it did not dare to decide cases as they should have been decided.
The group then decided that they would impeach Andrew Johnson. The only thing that saved Andrew Johnson from impeachment, and saves us from behaving as a "banana republic" often behaves on the seizure of power by ambitious men, was the provision of the Constitution that required a two-thirds vote before the President could be removed from office. Power-hungry men, headed by a man who aspired above everything else to become President of the United States, and who was in line for the Presidency if Andrew Johnson had been removed from office, were prevented from taking control by a provision of our Constitution which required a two-thirds vote for impeachment, and then by only one vote short of the two-thirds majority.
If the provision referred to had been in the Constitution at that time—"The commencement and termination of any inability shall be determined by such method as Congress may by law pro-vide"—Andrew Johnson would have been removed from office. The group would have set up a medical commission and had President Johnson declared mentally disabled. But they did not have the power under the Constitution. The only way that they could have removed him would have been by impeachment, and only by impeachment by a two-thirds majority.
With this substitute amendment incorporated in the Constitution, any time that power-hungry men in Congress were willing to go to the extremes that men were willing to go to in those days, they could take charge of the Presidency. Under the Dirksen proposal, they could provide that one of their favorite Members should succeed to the office of President if there were no Vice President at the time. That is a dangerous thing.
Mr. President, someone has very wisely said that a nation which does not remember the history of the past is doomed to repeat its mistakes.
So this amendment should be rejected for at least two reasons. It does not deal adequately with the question of vacancies in the Vice Presidency, and it would place dangerous power in the hands of Congress.
I am not disturbed about the doctrine of the separation of powers here, because the powers of government are not always separated. The Constitution provides, for example, that a President can be impeached, and be removed from office by the Senate. The Constitution provides a good many things that must be done by the President and the Congress. The Constitution provides that the President may make treaties, but they must be ratified by the Senate. It provides that the President shall appoint heads of departments of the Federal Government, judges, ambassadors, and other officers of the United States; but the nominations are subject to confirmation by the Senate, under the Constitution.
So there are many cases in which the powers of government are jointly reposed in both the executive and the legislative branch.
This amendment should be rejected for those two reasons. The joint resolution
3270	CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE	February 19, 1965
presented by the committee contains full protection against any group of men
thirsting for power taking over the office
of the Presidency, as could be done by the Dirksen proposal, because it requires
a two-thirds vote. It requires action of the Vice President and members of the Cabinet and action by Congress to remove the President or Vice President.
I agree with my good friend from Nebraska, in that I do not like to have too many specific things written into the Constitution, but when we try to protect somebody, we had better write specifics into the Constitution if we do not want to run the risk of converting the United States into what I would call a banana republic. We had better provide for a two-thirds vote by the Congress, such as the joint resolution reported by the committee provides, to remove the President from office, where he risks the charge of disability.
Mr. BAYH. Mr. President, will the Senator yield?
Mr. ERVIN. I yield.
Mr. BAYH. I am glad the Senator from North Carolina has pointed out the time when our forefathers determined that there should be a commingling of the various branches which in most cases we keep separate. I am also glad he pointed out the need for specifics under certain circumstances.
It seems to me that a close analysis of our Constitution discloses that it is a wonderful, broad, general plan for a wonderful society, but at the same time certain basic specifics to protect certain inalienable rights are necessary, such as the basic features provided in article 2, section 1, which has since been replaced by the 12th amendment. It specifically provides, in great detail, how elections shall be conducted, because we do not want Congress to take away from the people the right to decide for themselves.
As the Senator knows, the Constitution contains many specific qualifications—for example, to be President, and to be Members of this great body.
I commend the Senator for what he has said about the qualifications provided.
Mr. ERVIN. As the Senator knows, in the Bill of Rights specifics are provided for the protection of the individual against governmental tyranny. There are specifics protecting the individual against unreasonable searches and seizures of his papers, effects, and home. The Constitution contains specifics to protect many rights.
That is the reason why the amendment proposed by the committee was prepared in the form it is in. It was necessary to protect a President against a power-hungry Congress, on the one hand, and also to see to it that there was proper protection before such drastic steps should be taken.
Mr. SALTONSTALL. Mr. President, will the Senator from Indiana yield for a question?
Mr. BAYH. I am glad to yield to the Senator from Massachusetts, who has been an ardent ally from an early date.
Mr. SALTONSTALL. This may be a small, immaterial matter, but I would like to clarify it in my mind and for the RECORD.
Turning to section 3 of the Senator's proposed constitutional amendment, it reads:
Whenever the President transmits to the President of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives his written declaration that he is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office, such powers and duties shall be discharged by the Vice President as Acting President.
Under the Constitution, the Vice President is President of the Senate, but if he became Acting President under this amendment, he would no longer be President of the Senate, but the President Pro tempore would become the President of the Senate. Is that correct?
Mr. BAYH. That is correct.
Mr. SALTONSTALL. The Vice President would become Acting President and thereby lose his title as President of the Senate. Is that correct?
Mr. BAYH. That is correct. I point out for the RECORD, with respect to the wording of the amendment, that, as originally introduced and as reported by the committee, it was suggested that the message would be transmitted to Congress. We were determined to think of all eventualities that could possibly happen. We determined that such an eventuality might happen when Congress was not in session. Therefore we changed the wording so that it would read that the transmission should be to the President of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives. By that wording, the normal, legal procedure of delivery would take place in the manner set out. Delivery to the President of the Senate and the Speaker of the House would be sufficient for the intention of the resolution.
Mr. SALTONSTALL. May I ask the Senator from Indiana, who has worked so hard in this matter, a question? Perhaps he has answered it in his speech when I was not present in the Chamber. If Congress were not in session, would the fact that the transmission is to be to the President of the Senate and the Speaker of the House automatically call Congress into session?
Mr. BAYH. It is specifically provided in section 5, when it is necessary for Congress to convene, that it shall immediately proceed to decide. We think that is sufficient to enable the President of the Senate or the Speaker of the House to call a special session.
Mr. ERVIN. Mr. President, will the Senator from Indiana yield to me for the purpose of clarifying the question asked by the Senator from Massachusetts?
Mr. BAYH. I yield.
Mr. ERVIN. The amendment originally provided for the report to be made
to Congress. The auestion was raised
whether a report could be made to Congress when Congress was in adjournment.
So we adopted the language that the re-
port should be made to the President of the Senate and the Speaker of the
House of Representatives to make cer-
tain that the Vice President could take over, immediately, in case of the Presi-
dent's disability, without waiting for Congress to meet. But it is implied that Congress shall meet, because section 5 contains the language, "Congress shall immediately proceed."
Mr. SALTONSTALL. Therefore, either the President of the Senate or the
Speaker of the House, or both, would call Congress into session, and they would have the power to do it?
Mr. ERVIN. Yes; that would be implied from the fact that Congress would meet immediately.
Mr. SALTONSTALL. But if Congress adjourned sine die, there would not have
to be any provision in the sine die adjournment to permit those officers to call it back into session.
Mr. ERVIN. No.
Mr. SALTONSTALL. We sometimes include such a provision.
Mr. ERVIN. Yes.
Mr. SALTONSTALL. It would be automatic?
Mr. ERVIN. Yes.
Mr. President, my good friend from Nebraska referred to the testimony of the present Attorney General in 1963. I invite the Senator's attention to the hearings, at pages 10 and 11. I read from the bottom of page 10:
In my testimony during the hearings of 1963, I expressed the view that the specific procedures for determining the commencement and termination of the President's inability should not be written into the Constitution, but instead should be left to Congress so that the Constitution would not be encumbered by detail. There is, however, overwhelming support for Senate Joint Resolution 1, and widespread sentiment that these procedures should be written into the Constitution. The debate has already gone on much too long. Above all, we should be concerned with substance, not form. It is to the credit of Senate Joint Resolution 1 that it provides for immediate self-implementing procedures that are not dependent on further congressional or Presidential action. In addition, it has the advantage that the States, when called upon to ratify the proposed amendment to the Constitution, will know precisely what is intended. In view of these reasons supporting the method adopted by Senate Joint Resolution 1, I see no reason to insist upon the preference I expressed in 1963 and assert no objection on that ground.
Mr. BAYH. Mr. President—
The PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. TYDINGS in the chair). The Senator from Indiana.
Mr. BAYH. I should like to suggest that this might be the appropriate time to ask unanimous consent to have printed in the RECORD a letter which I received yesterday from the Attorney General, Nicholas Katzenbach, in an effort to clarify and point out specifically that his opinion does away with some of the rumors to the contrary.
There being no objection, the letter was ordered to be printed in the REcoRD, as follows:
OFFICE OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL,
Washington, D.C., February 18, 1965. Hon. BIRCH BAYH,
U.S. Senate, Washington, D.C.
DEAR SENATOR BATH: I understand that recent newspaper reports have raised some question as to whether I favor the solution for the problem of presidential inability embodied in Senate Joint Resolution 1, or whether I prefer a constitutional amendment which would empower Congress to enact appropriate legislation for determining when inability commences and when it terminates. Obviously, more than one acceptable solution to the problem of presidential inability
