Fordham Law School
FLASH: The Fordham Law Archive of Scholarship and History
Congressional Materials	Twenty-Fifth Amendment Archive
2-25-1975
Examination of the First Implementation of Section
Two of the Twenty-Fifth Amendment: Hearing on
S.J. Res.26 Before the Subcommittee on
Constitutional Amendments of the Committee of
the Judiciary, Senate, 94th Congress
Subcommittee on Constitutional Amendments; Committee on the Judiciary. Senate. United States.
Follow this and additional works at: http://ir.lawnet.fordham.edu/
twentyfifth_amendment_congressional_materials
Part of the Law Commons 
Recommended Citation
Subcommittee on Constitutional Amendments; Committee on the Judiciary. Senate. United States., "Examination of the First Implementation of Section Two of the Twenty-Fifth Amendment: Hearing on S.J. Res.26 Before the Subcommittee on Constitutional Amendments of the Committee of the Judiciary, Senate, 94th Congress" (1975). Congressional Materials. 10. http://ir.lawnet.fordham.edu/twentyfifth_amendment_congressional_materials/10
This Book is brought to you for free and open access by the Twenty-Fifth Amendment Archive at FLASH: The Fordham Law Archive of Scholarship and History. It has been accepted for inclusion in Congressional Materials by an authorized administrator of FLASH: The Fordham Law Archive of Scholarship and History. For more information, please contact tmelnick@law.fordham.edu.
EXAMINATION OF THE FIRST IMPLEMENTATION OF SECTION TWO OF THE TWENTY-FIFIt AMENDMENT
a
HEARING
BEFORE THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON
CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENTS
OF THE
COMMITTEE, ON THE JUDICIARY
UNITED STATES SENATE
NINETY-FOURTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
ON
S.J. Res. 26
PROPOSING MODIFICATION OF THE TWENTY-FIFTH
AMENDMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED
STATES
Printed for the use of the Committee on the Judiciary
0
U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
64463 0	WASHINGTON : 1976
s5atAvid
COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY
94TH CONGRESS, 1ST SESSION
JAMES 0. EASTLAND, Mississippi, Chairman
JOHN L. McCLELLAN, Arkansas PHILIP A. HART, Michigan EDWARD M. KENNEDY,
Massachusetts
BIRCH BAYHndiana
QUENTINBURDICK,B
N. 	North Dakota
ROBERT TUNNEL, West Virginia
JOHN V. 	California JAMES ABOUREZK, South Dakota ROMAN L. HRUSKA, Nebraska HIRAM L. FONG, Hawaii HUGH SCOTT, Pennsylvania STROM THURMOND,South Carolina CHARLES McC. MATHIAS, JR.,
-Maryland
WILLIAM L SCOTT, Virginia
SUBCOMMITTEE ON CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENTS
BIRCH BATH, Indiana, Chairman
JAMES 0. EASTLAND, Mississippi	HIRAM L. FONG, Hawaii
QUENTIN N. BURDICK. North Dakota	STROM THURMOND, South Carolina
JAMES G. ABOUREZK, South Dakota	CHARLES McC. MATHIAS, JR.,
PHILIP A. HART, Michigan	Maryland
WILLIAM L. SCOTT, Virginia
J. WILLIAM HECKMAN, Jr., Chief Counsel
MARILYN R. BERNINO, Assistant Clerk
,r.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
Pastore, Hon. John 6., U.S. Senator from Rhode Island__ 	2
Hathaway, Hon. William D., U.S. Senator from Maine 	19
Rodino, Hon. Peter W., Jr., U.S. Representative from New Jersey 	34
FEBRUARY 26, 1975
Scalia, Hon. Antonin, Assistant Attorney General, U.S, Department of
Justice, Washington, D.C. 	47
Schlesinger, Prof. Arthur, Jr., City College of New York, N.Y 	67
Burns, Professor James McGregor, Williams College, Williamstown,
Mass	 106
MARCH 11, 1975
Griffin, Hon. Robert P., U.S. Senator from Michigan	 125
Reedy, George E., Dean, Department of Journalism, Marquette University,
Milwaukee, Wisconsin 	 184
Freund, Prof. Paul A., Harvard University Law School, Cambridge, Mass	 136
Feerick, John D., Esq., American Bar Association, New York, N.Y	 143
STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD
Abzug, Bella S., U.S. Representative from New York, March 20, 1975____ 158 Bartell, Robert M., Public Relations Consultant, Liberty Lobby, Wash-
ington, D.C., February 24, 1975 	173
Bayh, Hon. Birch E., U.S. Senator from Indiana, February 25, 1975 	17
Capozi, Louis J., Graduate Assistant, St. John's University, Jamaica,
N.Y 	 181
Ford, Hon. Gerald R., President, United States of America, Remarks of
the President, Question and Answer Session at the Society of Profes-
	sional Journalists, November 14, 1974    180
Humphrey, Hon. Hubert H., U.S. Senator from Minnesota, Congressional
Record, February 17, 1975	 182
Kelleher, Robert L., Esq., Attorney at Law, Billings, Mont., March 20,
1975 	 163
Peabody, Endicott, Washington, D.C., Testimony Before the Subcommittee
on Constitutional Amendments, March 20, 1975	 161
ADDITIONAL MATERIAL
Christopher, Warren, "A Special Election to Fill a Presidential Vacancy", The Record, Association of the Bar, City of New York, vol. 30, No.
1/4, January/February 1975	 175
Countryman, Vern, professor of law, Letter to the Editor, The New York
Times, March 11, 1975	 179
Craig, Walter E., chief judge, Letter to the Hon. Birch Bayh, March 10,
1975 	 178
WITNESSES FEBRUARY 23, 1975
Pap
Feerick, John D., Esq., American Bar Association, New York, N.Y., appendix A to statement of March 11, 1975, "Consensus and Analysis of Presidential Inability and Succession" by the American Bar Association
at its National Forum	 188
Feerick, John D., Esq., American Bar Associa tion, New York, N.Y., appendix B to statement of March 11, 1975, "The Special Committee on Election Reform Recommendation", American Bar Association Report
to the House of Delegates	 142
Freund, Paul A., Abram Chayes and Raoul Berger, Harvard Law School, letter to Hon. Kevin H. White, mayor of Boston, dated November 1,
1978  	23
Killian, Johnny H., "Provision for Special Election in Event of Vacancies
in Office of President and Vice President", Congressional Research
Service, Legislative Attorney, Congressional Record, November 9, 1973 	25
Schlesinger, Arthur M., Jr., "Memorandum on Candidate Selection for a
Special Presidential Election" 	73
Schlesinger, Arthur M., Jr., "On the Presidential Succession", Political
Science Quarterly, vol. 89, No. 3, fall 1974 	75
Senate Joint Resolution 28 	1
APPENDIX
Senate Report No. 1382, 88th Congress, 2d session	 184
Senate Report No. 66, 89th Congress, 1st session	 205
House Report No. 203, 89th Congress, 1st session	 229
Conference Report No. 564, 89th oCngress, let session	 252
THE 25TH AMENDMENT
TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 25, 1975
U.S. SENATE,
SUBCOMMITTEE ON CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:10 a.m., in room 318, Russell Senate Office Building, Senator Birch Bayh (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Senators Bayh (presiding) and Fong.	--
Also present : J. William Heckman Jr., chief counsel and Marilyn R. -Berning, assistant clerk.
Senator BAYH. We will convene our hearing.
This morning, we are beginning a series of hearings designed to review and analyze the implementation, for the first time, of section 2 of the 25th amendment to the Constitution and to examine the way it has operated as well as to examine several proposals that have been made for its modification and improvement.
I have a few words as an opening statement here, but I know our lead witness, the distinguished Senator from Rhode Island, is carrying many burdens and is anxious to get on about this business. If my distinguished colleague from Hawaii feels compelled to proceed now, he certainly may, and I might suggest we permit the Senator from Rhode Island to proceed.
Senator FONG. Yes. I know the Senator from Rhode Island is very busy. I had breakfast with him and he had to run away very early. So I think we can proceed, Mr. Chairman, without our statements at the present time.
[S. J. RES. 20, 94th Cong., first seas.]
JOINT RESOLUTION —Proposing modification of the twenty.fifth amendment of the
Constitution of the United States.
Resolved by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled (two-thirds of each House concurring therein), That the following article is proposed as an amendment to the Constitution of the United States, which shall be valid to all intents and purposes as part of the Constitution if ratified by the legislatures of three-fourths of several States within seven years after the date of final passage of this joint resolution:
"Amax—
"SECTION 1. If an individual takes the office of Vice President under section 2 of the twenty-fifth article of amendment and subsequently becomes President under section 1 of that article at a time when more than twelve months remain in the term of the President, then—
"(a) there shall be a special election for the offices of President and Vice President,
(1)
2
"(b) section 2 of the twenty-fifth article of amendment shall not apply to the vacancy in the office of the Vice President caused by such individual becoming President,
"(c) such individual shall serve as President only until a President elected in such special election takes the oath of office of President,
"(d) the Speaker of the House of Representatives, shall in addition to his duties as Speaker, act as Vice President, and perform the duties of that office, with one exception that the President pro tempore of the Senate shall serve as President of the Senate with voting privileges, until a Vice President elected in such special election takes the oath of office, and
"(e) in the event the Senate shall be equally divided, the Secretary of State may cast a vote to break the tie.
"SEc. 2. The provisions of this Constitution relating to the appointment of electors for President and Vice President shall apply in the case of special elections required by section 1(a). The Congress shall by law prescribe the date for such elections and such other matters relating to such elections as may be necessary to effectuate the purpose of this article.
"SEc. 3. The individuals elected as President and Vice President in a special election required by section 1(a) shall become President and Vice President upon taking their respective oaths of office. Nothing contained in this article shall affect the terms of the President and Vice President as prescribed by section 1 [ Section 1] of the twentieth article of amendment".
STATEMENT OF JOHN 0, PASTORE, SENATOR FROM RHODE ISLAND; ACCOMPANIED BY, MARTIN DONOVAN, LEGISLATIVE ASSISTANT
Senator PASTORE. I want to thank the chairman and also the members of this committee for the opportunity to present my views on the 25th amendment, its operations, and in particular my own proposal to perfect its provisions.
Now, I want to say at the very outset that what I am proposing to do has nothing to do with, nor casts any reflection on, the present incumbents of the Office of the President and Vice President. As a matter of fact, realizing the procedure for the adoption of a proposal to amend the Constitution, takes years and years, the present incumbents would not even be affected by my proposal. At this juncture I would also like to say that what this committee set out to do in proposing the 25th amendment did meet the need of the moment. Certain events triggered the first operation of the 25th amendment. At that time we had the resignation of a Vice President. There was a vacancy in that office. And realizing, of course, that the Vice President is only a breath away from the Presidency and there might be a vacancy in the Presidency, as did occur, we had to have a line of succession that would make some sense, and-you provided that succession.
But the fundamental question that has bothered me for the longest time is that our forefathers in adopting our Constitution specifically provided that the people through electors would elect the President and that a President, in order to be an effective President, must be mandated by the people of the country.
The turn of events has been such that the first Vice President appointed under the 25th amendment did in fact become the President of the United States by virtue of that amendment and under the 25th amendment he in turn had to appoint a new Vice President, which of course he did. He appointed Nelson Rockefeller who was confirmed both by the House and by the Senate.
The purpose of my proposal is to allow the voice of the people to be expressed through an election should the situation ever arise where an appointed Vice President succeeds to the Presidency. It may never
3
recur, but if it happened once it could well happen again. It strikes me that fundamentally, this concept of election is the very efficacy of our democratic system.
Now, I realize that if this situation occurs within 1 year before a general election, you would have a problem as to time. So in my proposed amendment I have deliberately and intentionally stated that if this occurs within the 1 year, then you do not have a special election. But should a situation occur where you would possibly have an appointed President and an appointed Vice President, if that situation arises beyond this period of 1 year, then the Congress of the United States shall call a special election. If the people of this country should want to elect this appointed President, it is their privilege and their prerogative, but at least he will have to present his views to the country as a whole. That to me is very important, because for the very efficacy of democracy, you have to have a man chosen by the people.
Now, expressed in very simple terms that is all my amendment does. That is all it does.
I repeat again, what you did was worthwhile. It has worked well. No one questions that. But the point is that at the time that you were considering the 25th amendment, it was a very remote feeling, I would assume, on the part of this committee or anyone else that the occasion would ever arise that an appointed Vice President would in fact become the President of the United States.
Now, I repeat again, this is not directed to Gerald Ford. This is not directed to Nelson Rockefeller. This has nothing to do with the individuals. I am merely discussing a matter of principle. I am discussing
an incident of principle and all I am saying is that in the event that	•
both the President and the Vice President become appointed officials rather than elected officials, then if this occurs 1 year before the next general election, the Congress of the United States shall call a special election.
Senator FoNo. Those circumstances, Mr. Senator, you would have to set certain date limits, would you not, because this would—if you do not set the date limits lhe President could wait until the year and then try to appoint his Vice President to get away from an election.
Senator PASTORE. No. Under my proposal the election process is triggered the minute that the appointed Vice President becomes the President. Under the 25th amendment he shall appoint a Vice President. But, if he refuses to do that it would not make any difference at all. The minute you have an appointed President then under my amendment you will have to have a special election process set in motion.
Senator FoNo. If he takes some time in appointing that Vice President
Senator PASTORE. It would not make any difference.
Senator FONG [continuing]. And the Congress defers in the confirmation, then what happens?
Senator PASTORE. Well, you could—as a matter of fact, if the committee were amenable to my proposal,-they could write right in the amendment itself that he shall act within a period of 10 days or what have you. I mean, after all, that is only a detail. I would not excuse it.
4
Senator BATH. I do not want to interrupt the Senator. Are you through?
Senator PASTORE. Only one more thing. I ask, Mr. Chairman, that at this point the text of Senate Joint Resolution 26 be printed in the record. I also have a statement here that I ask to be placed in the record as though read and a section by section explanation of the proposal along with a brief prepared by my assistant and the Library of Congress. I ask that that also be made a part of the record.
Senator BATH. Without objection, so ordered.
[The material referred to. follows:]
[S. J. RES. 26, 94th Cong., first seas.]
JOINT RESOLUTION
Proposing modification of the twenty•lifth amendment of the Constitution of the
United States.
Resolved by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled (two-thirds of each House concurring therein), That the following article is proposed as an amendment to the Constitution of the United States, which shall be valid to all intents and purposes as part of the Constitution if ratified by the legislatures of three-fourths of the several States within seven years after the date of final passage of this joint resolution :
"ARTICLE-
"SECTION 1. If an Individual takes the office of Vice President under section 2 of the twenty-fifth article of amendment and subsequently becomes President under section 1 of that article at a time when more than twelve months remain in the term of the President, then—
"(a) there shall be a special election for the offices of President and Vice President.
"(b) section 2 of the twenty-fifth article of amendment shall not apply to the vacancy in the office of the Vice President caused by such individual becoming President.
"(c) such individual shall serve as President only until a. President elected in such special election takes the oath of office of President,
"(d) the Speaker of the House of Representatives, shall in addition to his duties as Speake'.., act as Vice President, and perform the duties of that office, with one exception that the President pro tempore of the Senate shall serve as President of the Senate with voting privileges, until a Vice President elected in such svcial election takes the oath of office, and
"(e) in the event the Senate shall be equally divided, the Secretary of State may cast a vote to break the tie.
"SEC. 2. The provisions of this Constitution relating to the appointment of electors for President and Vice President shall apply in the case of special elections required by section 1(a). The Congress shall by law prescribe the date for such elections and such other matters relating to such elections as may be necessary to effectuate the purpose of this article.
"SEc. 3. The individuals elected as President and Vice President in a special election required by section 1 (a ) shall become President and Vice President upon taking their respective oaths- of office. Nothing contained in this article shall affect the terms of the President and Vice President as prescribed by section 1 of the twentieth article of amendment.".
TESTIMONY RY SENATOR JOHN 0. PASTORE
Mr. Chairman, before I begin, I would like to thank you for the opportunity to present my views on the 25th Amendment and its operation and, in particular, my proposal to perfect those procedures.
As I have said publicly many times before, I have no quarrel with every section of the 25th Amendment and what it proposes to accomplish. Its provisions to fulfill a vacancy in the office of Vice President are undisputed. It works smoothly, as
5
we have already seen. It establishes a badly needed mechanism for trans-
formation of power to the Vice President in the event the President is
incapacitated.
But the scope of the 25th Amendment must be limited so that an appointed official should not succeed to the Presidency except on an interim basis. This is precisely the reason why I have introduced a Joint resolution to amend the Constitution to provide for a special election once an appointed Vice President accedes to the Presidency to fill a vacancy. My sole purpose is to correct what I perceive to be an omission, if not a flaw, in the 25th Amendment.
A look at the proceedings of the Constitutional Convention of 1787 clearly demonstrates that our founding fathers intended that the President and Vice President should be elective officers and that they explicity rejected the notion that the President should be appointed.
Article II, Section 1, of the Constitution declares without equivocation that the President and Vice President "be elected."
Therefore, under my proposal there would be a special election for the office of President and Vice President if an appointed Vice President accedes to the Presidency with more than twelve months to serve.
The special election would be held on a date to be set by Congress. I want it distinctly understood that my proposal in no way affects the powers of the present incumbents in these offices. This is not the reason for my proposal. As a matter of fact, the present situation may never rise again ; on the other hand, it could, and that is the reason why I believe that the Constitution should be perfected in this manner.
I would like, at this time, Mr. Chairman, to include as part of my remarks a memorandum prepared by my staff and the staff of the Library of Congress which sets forth the legal and historical background for my proposal and also contains a section-by-sectIon analysis of S. J. Res. 26.
POPULAR ELECTIONS AND THE TWENTY-FIFTH AMENDMENT: AN HISTORICAL AND LEGAL ANALYSIS
I. INTRODUCTION TO THE PROBLEM
An examination of our election machinery and the portions of the United States Constitution dealing with the office of the President and Vice President reveals a serious condition which is diametrically opposed to the American concept of popular elections. -
Under the Constitution, as it stands today, it is possible that the Office of the President and the Office of the Vice President be occupied by appointment rather than by electoral process. Conceivably this situation could continue for almost four years before a national election was held.
By operation of the Twenty-Fifth Amendment to the Constitution, if the office of the Vice President becomes vacant, the President shall appoint a new Vice President.
During that term, if the office of President becomes vacant the "appointed" Vice President will become the President.
Again, by operation of the Twenty-Fifth Amendment, this new President appoints a Vice President. We then have both offices billed by appointed individuals rather than by elected individuals. How many times this process could reoccur in the span of the original four-year term is left to conjecture.
The possibility of these events actually coming to pass was either overlooked by the framers of the Twenty-Fifth Amendment or considered too remote to warrant a separate clause in that Amendment. Perhaps the problem was not considered serious at that time. Times change.
As Richard P. Longaker, Professor of Political Science and Chairman of Department, University of California, Los Angeles, concluded in his article "Presidential Continuity : The Twenty-Fifth Amendment".
"When the twenty-fifth amendment is first applied, flaws now hidden will no doubt appear. Some of the inevitable imperfections are already evident, though their seriousness will depend on factors extrinsic to the wording of the amendment. (See, "Selected Materials on the Twenty-Fifth Amendment, Oct. 1973, Committee on the Judiciary, pg. 211, at 238).
Professor Longaker was indeed prophetic in his remarks in February of 1966. Today we are facing the appearance of one of these flaws, no longer hidden, but patently obvious. While the idea of repealing the Twenty-Fifth Amendment
6
need not be considered, some consideration must be given to an amendment which will improve the Twenty-Fifth Amendment. President Harry S. Truman, as indicated in the House documents of the 1st session of the 79th Congress (June 19, 1945 p. 6272) seemed genuinely concerned that it was undemocratic for a Vice President who had succeeded to the Presidency to be able to appoint his successor. He said in a letter to the Senate
"111 * • it now lies within my power to nominate the person who would be my immediate successor in the event of my own death or inability to act.
I do not believe that in a democracy this power should rest with the Chief Executive.
Insofar as possible, the office of the President should be filled by an elective officer. There is no officer in one system of government, besides the President and Vice President, who has been elected by all the voters of the country".
How much more undemocratic would it be for the appointed successor to appoint his successor? This situation should not be tolerated in our democratic system.
At this juncture, the concept of electing the President, should be analyzed from historical and legal viewpoints to remove any question as to the intent of the framers of the Constitution and the courts.
IL HISTORICAL BACKGROUND
From the creation of the presidency to the present, that office has been one that has been dominantly characterized as elected as opposed to appointed. The Constitutional Convention in 1787 had as one of its main objectives the development of the office of the President. One of the first provisions discussed at that Convention was the manner of electing the chief executive of the States. The first proposal was made by James Wilson, a lawyer, a chief architect of the Supreme Court and one of Washington's initial appointments as Associate Justice. Wilson's proposal was that the President be named by direct "election by the people". The proceedings of the Convention were secret, but according to James Madison's Journal, at least six delegates, including Madison himself and four other lawyers, endorsed Wilson's suggestion. No less than eight other methods of electing the President—among them the electoral college system—were proposed. Some of them were first adopted and then reconsidered and rejected. Not until the final weeks of the Convention was the electoral college method adopted. Thus, it was quite clear from the beginning of our constitutional form of government that the office of the presidency was to be an elected one and not an appointed one.
Moreover, at the Convention of 1787, Edmund Randolph submitted a plan of a national government in which he proposed "a national executive to be chosen by the national legislature for the term of ____ years . . . and to be ineligible a second time." Charles Pinckney, at the same time, proposed "that the executive power be vested in a President of the United States of America, which shall be his style; and his title shall be 'His Excellency.' He shall be elected for __-_ years, and shall be reeligible." The first decision of the Convention was that the term of the Executive should be seven years. James Wilson proposed that there should be "certain districts in each State which should appoint electors to elect outside of their own body." In these three propositions were the essential ele-
- ments of nearly all the features of the plan ultimately adopted. Again such propositions make it quite clear that the Convention's concept of the President was one that called for his election rather than appointment.
It should be noted that the Convention first adopted a resolution that the Executive should be chosen by Congress ; it also adopted a resolution that the executive power should be vested in one person. Elbridge Gerry proposed that the Executive should be elected by the governors of the several States; this plan was defeated. Alexander Hamilton presented a draft of a constitution to the Convention according to which the choice of a single executive officer, a President, was to be made by electors chosen by the people similar to the way they are now actually chosen ; and in case there was no choice by a majority of such electors, then an election from among the three highest candidates was to be made by a body of second electors two for each State, to be chosen by the first electors at the time of voting for a President who were to meet in one place and to be presided over by the Chief Justice.
The whole focus of the Convention of 1787 was in terms of electing the chief Executive and not appointing him. It was not until the final weeks of the Convention that the electoral college method of electing the President was adopted. It
7
was not an ideal way or even the best way of choosing a President ; rather it was a compromise device. The Convention refused to give the election of the President to the people; it also rejected amendments to give each State one vote for President ; and it defeated a proposition to give a casting vote to the President of the Senate.
Alexander Hamilton in the Federalist No. 68 (March 12, 1788) asserted the following in emphasizing the need for having the President elected :
"The mode of appointment of the chief magistrate of the United States is almost the only part of the system, of any consequence, which has escaped without severe censure, or which has received the slightest mark of approbation from its opponents. The most plausible of these, who has appeared in print, has even deigned to admit, that the election of the president is pretty well guarded. I venture somewhat further; and hesitate not to affirm, that if the manner of it be not perfect, it is at least excellent. It unites in an eminent degree all the advantages; the union of which was to be desired.
"It was desirable, that the sense of the people should operate in the choice of the person to whom so important a trust was to be confided. This end will be answered by committing the right of making it, not to any pre-established body, but to men, chosen by the people for the special purpose, and at the particular conjuncture.
"All these advantages will be happily combined in the plan devised by the convention ; which is, that the people of each state shall choose a number of persons as electors, equal to the number of senators and representatives of such state in the national government, who shall assemble within the state and vote for some fit person as president. Their votes, thus given, are to be transmitted to the seat of the national government, and the person who may happen to have a majority of the whole number of votes will be the president. But as a majority of the votes might not always happen to center on one man and as it might be unsafe to permit less than a majority to be conclusive, it is provided, that in such a contingency, the house of representatives shall select out of the candidates, who shall have the five highest numbers of votes, the man who in their opinion may be best qualified for the office:"
III. LEGAL BACKGROUND
Article II, Section I of the Constitution explicitly states that the President and Vice President of the United States "be elected". The immediate source of Article II was the New York Constitution in which the governor was elected by the people and thus independent of the legislature. His term was three years and he was indefinitely eligible. However, the ultimate plan that was adopted by the Convention was not one that was based on the New York way of electing Its governor. The adoption of the electoral college plan came late in the Convention which had previously adopted on four other occasions provisions for the election of the Executive by the Congress and had twice defeated proposals for the election by the people directly. The electoral college, however, probably did not work as any member of the Convention could have foreseen because the development of political parties and nomination of presidential candidates through them and the designation of electors by the parties soon reduced the concept of the elector as an independent force to the vanishing point in practice if not in theory. But the college remains despite numerous efforts to adopt another method.
Article II, Section I, Clause 2 of the Constitution provides :
"Each State shall appoint, in such Manner as the Legislature thereof may direct, a Number of Electors, equal to the whole Number of Senators and Representatives to which the State may be entitled in the Congress; but no Senator or Representative or Person holding an Office of Trust or Profit under the United States, shall be appointed an Elector."
Although Clause 2 seemingly vests complete discretion in the States, certain older cases recognized a federal interest in protecting the integrity of the process. The Supreme Court has upheld the power of Congress to protect the right of all citizens who are entitled to vote to lend aid and support in any legal manner to the election of any qualified person as a presidential elector,
Parte Yarbrough, 110 U.S. 651 (1884). The Yarbrough Court found that it is the duty of the Government to see that citizens may exercise the right to vote freely and to protect them from violence while so doing and that the votes by which its members of Congress and its President are elected shall be the free votes of the electors, Id., 662. That Court also found that the right to vote is based upon the Constitution and not upon State law and that Congress has the
power to pass laws for the pure, free, and safe exercise of this right, Id 6f$064. Its power to protect the choice of electors from fraud or corruption was sustained in Burroughs and Cannon v. United States, 290 U.S. 534 (1934).
More recently, substantial curbs on state discretion in regulating the selection of electors have been instituted by both the Supreme Court and Congress. In Williams v. Rhodes, 393 U.S. 23 (1968), the Court struck down a complex state scheme which effectively limited access to the ballot to the electors of the two major political parties. In the Court's view, the system violated the equal protection clause of the Fourteenth Amendment because it favored some and disfavored others and burdened both the right of individuals to associate together to advance political beliefs and the right of qualified voters to cast ballots for electors of their choice. The Court denied that the language of Article II, Section I, Clause 2 immunized such state practices from judicial scrutiny, and the Court rejected the notion that Article II, Section I of the Constitution gives the States the power to impose burdens on the right to vote where such burdens are expressly prohibited in other constitutional provisions.
In Oregon v. Mitchell, 400 U.S. 112 (1970), the Court upheld the power of Congress to reduce the voting age in presidential elections and to set a thirty-day residency period as a qualification for voting in presidential elections; the rationale was that the Fourteenth Amendment limits state discretion in prescribing the manner of selecting electors and that Congress in enforcing the Fourteenth Amendment may override state practices which violate that Amendment and substitute standards of its own.
IV. SUMMARY AND ANALYSIS OF THE PROPOSED AMENDMENT
It seems quite clear, both from a historical analysis and a legal analysis, that the concept of the presidency was embodied with the understanding that the
office was to be an elected one as opposed to being an appointed one. Moreover, the right to vote for the President has been upheld and safeguarded as the above cases have indicated. Congress has the power to protect that right to vote for the highest office of the land as well as the power to protect the election of the President and the Vice President from corruption, Burroughs and Cannon v. United States, supra.
It is now time for reflection to see if we have not strayed somewhat from our basic goal of rule by the people. If we have we must take the necessary steps to return to our primal goals.
When the Twenty-Fifth Amendment was being considered, arguments were made as to whether or not we needed to have a Vice President appointed, should a vacancy in that office occur. Some felt that the Succession Act of 1947 was adequate assurance of continuity of leadership. However, at least two-thirds of the Senate, two-thirds of the House, and three-quarters of the States decided that we should always have a Vice President. It is believed that this office is the best grooming one can have in case he be called on to succeed to the Presidency.
All this precaution is admirable and, indeed, prudent. The one vital ingredient missing is the choice of the people. The established machinery is admirable, but it should apply only to provide a suitable interim president—one who would serve only until the people choose a new President and Vice President by election.
In addition, a limit must be placed on the term of a president who neither faced an election nor received the mandate of the people. He should not be permitted to appoint his own successor. These choices must be returned to the people at the earliest practical time. No alternative can suffice if we are to remain a democracy.
The American people are willing to forego immediate choice in return for the assurance of capable leadership in a time of crisis accompanying a vacancy in the presidency.
However, it is doubtful that the American people want to give up this choice covering an indeterminable number of possible presidents for possibly four years.
To restore this choice to the American people the Pastoie Amendment would provide for a special election for president and vice president when an individual who has been appointed Vice President by operation of the Twenty-Fifth Amendment succeeds to the office of the President.
A section-by-section analysis of the Pastore Amendment follows ;
9
"Section 1. If an individual takes the office of Vice President under section 2 of the XXVth article of amendment and subsequently becomes President under section 1 of that article at a time when more than twelve months remain in the term of the I'resident, then—
"(a) there shall be a special election for the offices of President and Vice President,
"(b) section 2 of the XXVth article of amendment shall not apply to the vacancy in the office of the Vice President caused by such individual's becoming I'resident,
"(c) such individual shall serve as President only until a President elected in such special election takes the oath of office of President,
"(d) the Speaker of the House of Representatives, shall in addition to his duties as Speaker, act as Vice President, and perform the duties of that office, with the one exception that the President pro tempore of the Senate shall serve as President of the Senate with voting privileges until a Vice President elected in such special election takes the oath of office, and
"(e) in the event the Senate shall be equally divided, the Secretary of State may cast a vote to break the tie."
This section is designed to create a special election for the office of President and Vice President when an appointed Vice President pursuant to section 2 of article 25 succeeds to the presidency pursuant to section 1 of that amendment. More than twelve months must remain in the term of the former president in order for the election process to be implemented. This was done to provide enough time for proper choice of candidates by all parties wishing to announce a candidate. Any time lin than twelve months was not considered to constitute an abrogation of the electi rate's constitutional right to choose the president by election.
The special election process was provided in order to avoid any possible unconstitutionality of a special election grounded on an interpretation of the necessary and proper clause of Article I.
Section 2 of the XXVth article of amendment shall not apply to the vacancy in the vice presidency because that vacancy will automatically be filled by an acting Vice President in the person of the Speaker of the House of Representatives. This avoids the necessity for repealing any portion of the Twenty-Fifth Amendment.
The Speaker of the House of Representatives would assume all duties of the Vice President but would not give up his duties as Speaker in order that there be as little change as possible in the status quo during the transition period after a vacancy. This is also in keeping with the spirit of the current laws of succession. The one exception to the Speaker assuming all of the vice president's duties is that the President pro tempore of the Senate became the President of the Senate assuming this natural function. This was done in order that the leadership of both legislative bodies remain separate.
The President pro tempore would retain his voting privileges in order that no state be deorived of its two votes. In the event of a tie in the Senate, the Secretary of State may cast the tie-breaking vote. This was done because the Secretary of State is the next in line of succession in the Executive Branch behind the Vice President who would normally have that right under the Constitution.
The appointed vice president who succeeded to the presidency would serve as president and not as "acting president". His term would end when the newly elected president (after the special election) took his oath of office. The Speaker and the President pro tempore would return to their normal functions when the Vice President elect took his oath of office.
"Section 2. The provisions of this Constitution relating to the appointment of electors for President and Vice President shall apply in the case of special elections required by section 1 (a). The Congress shall by law prescribe the date for such elections and such other matters relating to such elections as may be necessary to effectuate the purposes of this article".
This section is designed to afford the special election the same treatment as a regular election and to utilize the existing system for elections. The only substantial change would be the date for such elections.
Under the Pastore Amendment Congress is given the flexibility to establish the date of election as circumstances dictate.
"Section 3. The individuals elected as President and Vice President in a special election required by Section 1(a) shall become President and Vice President upon taking their respective oaths of office. Nothing contained in this article shall
10
affect the terms of the President and Vice President as prescribed by section 1 of the XXth article of amendment."
The intent of this article is to insure that the individuals elected in a special election would serve only the remainder of the established term. This also precludes the necessity of repeal of the 20th Amendment.
The Pastore Amendment strives to work within the framework established by the Constitution from its inception to the present day. It begins and ends with the proposition that the people should elect their President and Vice President and to preserve this right this constitutional amendment is required.
Senator BATH. Could I ask you to think out-loud on a matter? Senator PASTORE. Yes.
Senator BATH. I have been involved in this matter since its infancy. I have the mixed feeling. of—I guess it goes with some very human feeling of pride of being involved—but concern over some things that are happening now that I wish were not, as a result. This is in reference to the decisions of the person chosen and I think we have that liability regardless of how the individual is chosen.
As best I can recall, the whole purpose for this article 2 was to use it. It could not be used unless the circumstances which the Senator from Rhode Island is concerned about took place.
Senator PASTORE. That is right.
Senator BATH. I mean, one can argue that you should have a Vice President just to function as a Vice President while I am prepared to accept the fact that the Vice President today has been utilized. Since President Truman started utilizing Alben Barkley, we had a change. Instead of the Vice President being, as John Nance Garner described him, as not worth a pitcher of warm spit and other less flattering descriptions, we have had the Vice President perform a living role. But the real reason for this was to provide someone who could fill in and could provide continuity in a manner that would be acceptable to the people, and we have gone through very tortuous circumstances with the Agnew-Nixon double whammy—the likes of which we have not seen in 200 years. I may be wrong, but in myjudgment the 25th amendment made it possible for us to change leaders without going through an impeachment trial. There are some people that say, we should have purified ourselves. We should have gone through some sort of a catharsis which I do hot think would have benefited anybody. An impeachment, would have disrupted the country, torn us up, I think. Even though the Judiciary Committee in the House, which is one of the most salutary things—few salutary things that happened in this tragic time—did give the people a chance to see men and women of both parties struggling with their consciences and making an objective appraisal. I just want to say that the only reason the Amendment is there is in the event it has to be used. The impact of your amendment, which we are going to give serious consideration to, would suggest there would be no other purpose for article 2 except for a loss of both the President and Vice President.
Senator PASTORE. That is right.
Senator BATH. And let me ask about one concern.
Senator PASTORE. Before you do, let me say this: what you set out to do, you did perfectly. You did marvelously well. But I do not think it entered anybody's mind,. at the time that we were going to meet with the situation that confrontv,t us when Nixon resigned.
Senator BATH. Not the Agnew-Nixon thing. No, sir.
11
Senator PASTORE. You see, I am not saying it is a flaw, although it could be considered a flaw, but it is an omission that is understandable. What you started out to do, you did very, very well. You filled the Office of the Vice Presidency, and today in the kind of world in which we live we need a Vice President to assist the President in his many chores. Under the Constitution, his only right as you have well said is to preside over the Senate. He does not even have a right to speak unless the Senate gives him permission to speak. All he has is the power to break a tie. That is the only time he can vote. We understand all that, but today in the complexity of our modern world, a Vice President is a very, very important. Ambassador for the President. He assumes chores that have to do with the domestic situation as Nelson Rockefeller is doing.
I repeat again, this is not aimed at the personalities, this is not aimed at Gerald Ford as the President. This has nothing to do with him because it could not affect him in the least. It has nothing to do with Nelson Rockefeller, but all I am saying is in the annals of our history, and I hope this Republic lasts for all eternity, the time might come when this may happen again. What if it does happen soon after the general, quadrennial election? Let's assume that by some unexplainable or unimaginable situation, we lose a Vice President and then a President who have been elected by the people within a month after they qualify for the office. This country will be subjected to being governed by two individuals who have not been elected by the people, for a period of almost 4 years.
Now, it may be a good thing, it may not be a good thing, but after all, it is inimicable to the very sense of our Constitution which provided that the. people through the electoral college shall elect their President. That is the bulwark of democracy, because if our Founding Fathers wanted to appoint, they would have provided for it. Moreover, that argument was made during the Constitutional Convention. That argument was made, and it was finally decided that he had to be elected, and that is the reason why they wrote it into the Constitution. All I am saying is that the situation that exists today, you see, is inimicable to that original sense and that concept, that it could happen again in the future, and that we ought to begin to think about it.
I realize this is a highly academic situation, but there are those of us who believe that we have a responsibility to respond in the construction of our Constitution to make it perfect, as perfect as it can be. We are worried about the present situation and the real possibility that it could arise again.
Senator BAYH. May I ask if you would just give us your thoughts about one of the concerns I have about the alternative of an election, and I am normally an election man. As you know, you have been a cosponsor of our efforts in which we are continuing to do something about the electoral college. The people do not elect the President. The people elect the electors. The reason the electoral college was designed is not being fullfilled. We would all be passed if the system was individual electors casting individual votes ; yet they may. So, the theory of an election is good.
Now, your proposal would elect both the President and the Vice President V
12
Senator PASTORE. That is correct.
Senator BATH. Therefore, you would not have a split between the Presidency and the Vice Presidency as some proposals which would just elect the President?
Senator PASTORE. That is right.
Senator BATH. Nor elect a Vice President to fill the vacancy by an election?
Senator PASTORE. That is right.
Senator BATH. The period by which we change national leaders—other than the normal quadrennial period, death, assassination, res-ignation—is a very emotional period. It is a time of instability, instances of doubt, and in this instance, an unfortunate situation that had not existed in 200 years. I do not think my distinguished colleague from Hawaii, who helped put this together, and I know I did not, could envision this kind of thing happening. We hope and pray it does not happen again. But if the situation goes to the very credibility of the previous election, then it is different than the Kennedy situation or a Roosevelt death. I just ask you to give us your thoughts about those two particular times because I am certain you can remember the spirit of the country—the concern that people had. The question was raised, could we get along without an FDR? What about the Kennedy assassination where the country doubted—they wondered ? The fact that there was a Vice President who could move on in there with a ready transition, sort of like a rock, I mean caused us all to rally around 'him and to get together and to unite. Both the men that succeeded were wise enough to say, "OK, let us pull together and carry on the former leader's mandate."
Now, the only down side I can see about an election—we are all committed to elections, but they are not without significant controversy. Also, they are not without divisiveness and polarization; and that kind of experience would be thrust on the country at a time when we really need something to pull us together.
Senator PASTORE. Well, that is true, and you are reciting in a very indirect way what I said at the convention in 1964. At a time when Lyndon Johnson was up for election. Of course, Lyndon Johnson was elected as Vice President of the United States. It is not the same situation of which we are talking about now. He was an elected Vice President and he would step into the Presidency, and in a case like that my amendment would not take effect. I said at that convention in 1964, and I can echo what I said, "In a moment of national tragedy, the Nation took a measure of that man, and Lyndon Johnson was not found wanting." However, he was an elected Vice President. -
But today the situation we have, neither the President nor the Vice President is elected by the people. And in the minds of some people, that raises the question whether democracy should operate in that way.
Now, understand, maybe through the appointment process you might possibly get a better man than if he were elected President, but that is not the point. The point is that it should go back to the people. The appointed Vice President who becomes President shall only be an interim President. Then if he wants to stand up before the people and if the people elect him; then he is mandated by the people. I think that even Gerald Ford would feel more comfortable if he had been elected as President of the United States.
13
Not that I am faulting him that he was not. I mean please do not misunderstand me, but I would like to feel that I am m the Senate of the United States because the people sent me here, and not because the Governor appointed me to come here. It is a comfortable feeling to know that the people sent you here.
Senator BAYH. Indeed it is. I have just gone through that for the third time. It is a sense of satisfaction.
Senator PASTORE. I have been through it five times.
Senator BATH. Well, I know I am still in the minor leagues compared to my distinguished colleague from Rhode Island. But let me share a thought with you. You might comment or not, about the similarity between the way the second section of the 25th amendment is supposed to work and the present electoral process, where the Senator from Rhode Island knows painfully well we elect electors, 585 or so, I guess. We elect two or three more from. the District of Columbia now. Three. So it would be 538 electors.
Senator PASTORE. Well, of course, the Senator from Rhode Island has always felt we were a government of the people, for the people, and by the people, and I believe in popular elections, but in this day and age, and in this point in time, I do not think you would ever pass it in the Senate of the United States, because that is a unibody.
Senator Foxo. Coming from a small State, you would look at it twice, would you not ?
Senator PASTORE. No. No. As a matter of fact, I am really for popular elections. I feel that this is a government of people and that the people ought to elect their President directly without regard to the electoral college, but you cannot argue that the electoral college defeats the purpose of my amendment for the simple reason that even those electors are elected.
Senator Form. But in view of the fact that we have to proclaim a-day in which the delegates would be elected to go to the convention, then you are going to have to have a convention, and after the convention there will be time for elections. It will probably take about 4 or 5 months before the machinery can be put into action.
Senator PASTORE. That is right, and the present
Senator FONG. You do not figure that the 1 year you propose is a little short ?
Senator PASTORE. No. As a matter of fact, the 1 year term, you see, would make my amendment inoperable. In other words, if the election was to take place, let us say, on November 5, 1976, whatever the date, and the vacancies occur, you see, on November 10th of 1975, my amendment would not apply, you see. But if it occurred before the 1 year-now, yod-Ceuld make it 18 months. I do not care how you make it but the point here is that it has got to be ff convenient time in order for the Congress to stipulate what the procedure shall be. It might be a regular full-blown convention, it could be a mini-convention, it could be the executive committee of the parties. It could be almost anything. But that would be up to the Congress. The Congress would spell out the procedure and the procedure would have to be consonant with what the time element might be.
Senator BATH. I just want to complete my thought of a moment ago. This is to suggest that the electoral college, would defeat the purpose of the Senator's amendment. But rather, it is to suggest that if
54-552 0 - 75 - 2
14
there was a fault in the way we approached the Ford and Rockefeller nominations in Congress, it was that some of our colleagues did not understand what their role was. Their role was to serve as an elector—even more than the elector that is elected in a Presidential election. There was no question. Some of our colleagues on the floor debated this, countrarywise, but they must not have been present when we were forming this on the floor. The debate is replete time after time where the Senator from Indiana, the Senator from Illinois, Senator Dirksen, and several others who were involved in this, the distinguished gentleman from Hawaii, stressed the fact that our role was to represent the people. This was not an advise and consent process like an Ambassador or Cabinet official. That is why we brought in the House, the most populous body. I do not know whether that eases the concern that the Senator from Rhode Island has. I would feel a bit easier about this if, indeed, our colleagues had recognized that the process was more than advise and consent.
Senator PASTORE. 'Well, now, if you look at related situations, under the Constitution, if you look at the 12th amendment you will find that the House does make a choice where there is a tie between two candidates, but you have got to realize the predicate there is that these two candidates did go before the people. Article 20 of the Constitution has to do with qualifying an elected Vice President to assume the office of the Presidency until the President qualifies, but there again he had been elected by the people. So, if under the Constitution, the requirement is that you must be 35 years of age before you can ascend to the Presidency of the United States, and by chance, as has happened many times in the Senate, a person who has not yet reached eligible age has to wait before he can take his oath of office to qualify, in that particular case the 20th amendment is invoked but there again they are dealing with individuals who have been elected by the people.
So, if a young man or a young woman who runs for the Presidency is elected to that office when they are 33 years old, or 34 years old, the 20th amendment is invoked to say that the Vice President shall be the acting President during the inability of the elected President to qualify. And then when he becomes 35 years of age, automatically he takes the oath of office and the Vice President steps down from the acting Presidency.
I want to thank the committee for your kindness and your courtesy, and I hope that we have been somewhat helpful.
Senator BAYII. We appreciate your concern. Senator Pastore.
Senator BAYH. I have here a statement of Charles A. 'Wright, who is the Charles T. McCormick Professor of Law at the University of Texas, who is one of the distinguished constitutional Lawyers of the country who was asked to testify. Mr. Wright found it impossible to be here but did send a rather comprehensive statement which I think will be helpful to us to submit in the record.
[Statement referred to follows :]
STATEMENT OF CHARLES ALAN WRIGHT
I am Charles Alan Wright. I hold the Charles T. McCormick Professorship of Law at The University of Texas. For many years I have taught Constitutional Law and I have written extensively in that field of the law. Like all of those who are interested in the Constitution and the form of government we
15
enjoy in this country, I folloi'ed closely the process that led to the adoption of the Twenty-Fifth Amendment in 1967 and the two very recent occasions in which the provisions of $ 2 of the Amendment, dealing with a vacancy in the office of the Vice President, have been used.
In my judgment the Twenty-Fifth Amendment has worked well. It would, I think, be a mistake to propose any change in it.
In part that conclusion stems from my general attitude that we should proceed very cautiously indeed in amending the Constitution. After the adoption of the Bill of Rights in 1791, the Constitution was amended only 12 times in 160 years. It is true that we have turned to the amendatory process more frequently in very recent years, with four amciidments adopted and another pending for ratification since 1961. Of course we should not refrain from amendments when the need for them is clear. Article V is as vital a part of the Constitution as any other. Nevertheless constitutional amendment should not be undertaken lightly, and should not be attempted until there is a clear national consensus that the Constitution, as it stands, is defective in some particular and that the proposed change would indeed be an improvement.
I am not persuaded that either of these criteria is satisfied with regard to 2 of Amendment XXV. The objection seems to be that for the first time in our history we have a President and a Vice President, neither of whom has been elected by the people. The events that have led to the present situation are unprecedented in our history, and while the same result could occur under more routine circumstances—as if, for example, an elected Vice President who were to succeed to the Presidency on the death of the incumbent were himself to die
- or become disabled while in office—the possibility that this circumstance might occur for brief periods on very rare occasions does not seem the kind of rear need for which the amendatory process is intended.
More fundamentally, the objection to the present state of affairs seems to me more verbal than real. It Is only in the most formal and technical sense that our regular Vice Presidents are "elected." It stretches reality to suggest that the voters of the country really chose to have Calvin Coolidge or Harry Truman as second in line for the Presidency. I suggest that that is true also of Lyndon Johnson. Although he may have helped the 1960 Democratic ticket in the South, and his presence on the ticket may have tipped the scales in a close election, it is far from clear that he would have been the winner in a separate election to be Vice President.
Although President Ford and Vice President Rockefeller have never been elected to national office, their nominations as Vice President were confirmed by both Houses of Congress, in which the elected representatives of the nation do sit. They were each, when nominated, men of national stature with wide experience in public affairs, who do not suffer from comparison with the great majority of vice-presidential candidites hastily chosen by one who has been nominated for the Presidency at the end of a hectic convention and routinely approved for second place on the ticket by the convention itself. The careful scrutiny given every aspect of their lives in the confirmation process provides safeguards wholly unknown in the selection of most of our Vice Presidents.
Thus I think that the procedure introduced in 1967 has functioned well when it was put to the test—and it seems to me far superior to any alternative I have heard discussed. Surely it would be unthinkable to go back to the former student in which the Speaker of the House of Representatives was next in line if there was a vacancy in the Vice Presidency. History is filled with those who have served the country well as Speaker who would have been ill-suited, often because of age, for the Presidency. There is the further difficulty that the Speaker not infrequently is not of the President's party, and to make him next in line incurs a substantial risk that the fortuities of death or disability may take the Presidency away from a party that has been given a popular mandate to lead the country for four years and give that office to the party rejected at the polls.
For similar reasons I reject proposals that there should be a special election for Vice President if that office becomes vacant or that if one who has become Vice President should succeed to the Presidency, he should have to stand for office in a special election shortly thereafter. I think that the party system as we have known it in the United States, with choice made every four years between two strong and responsible parties, has contributed greatly to the stability of American government. I think it would be a distinct step in the wrong direction to move toward a parliamentary form of government or even to edge gingerly
16
in that way by providing a machinery that, under some circumstances, would require election of a national officer other than at the regular four-year periods. I close as I began. I think f 2 of the Twenty-Fifth Amendment has worked well under difficult circumstances and that it should not be changed.
Senator BAYTI. Our next witness is to be the distinguished Junior Senator from Maine, Senator Hathaway, who will be here in about 5 minutes. He is in another committee.
Pending his arrival, I will read my statement and ask that it be put in the record at the beginning, and ask unanimous consent that the Senator from Hawaii be permitted to insert any remarks prior to putting it in the record.
Many serious students of democracy and the American experience have suggested that the events of recent months, which led to the elevation to our highest office of a man not directly selected by a vote of the people, raise fundamental questions about the nature of our democracy. The Senator from Hawaii is one of those.
Several serious proposals, including his, have been put forward to change the existing Presidential succession mechanism. Because the subcommittee believed that these concerns merited a full examination, we decided to convene these hearings.
Two things should, I think, be pointed out initially. First, because our Constitution still contains the anachronistic electoral college system, we do not choose our Presidents by direct popular vote—some-thing which hopefully Congress and the States will consider changing in the near future by constitutional amendment.
Second, since the ratification of the 12th amendment, our Vice Presidents are "elected" to the Nation's second highest office only in the most technical sense. As one observer has commented, "It stretches reality to suggest that the voters of the country really chose to have Calvin Coolidge or Harry Truman as second in line for the Presidency."
As we look back and see more recently how President Truman performed as President, we may not remember that at the time he succeeded to the Presidency or at the time he was chosen, there was great question as to the wisdom of that choice, and that it was the strong personality of the Presidential candidate, President Roosevelt, that was the subject of the major thrust of that election.
Nevertheless, because of the use for the first time of the provisions of the 25th amendment, we now have as our President a man who was actually elected to public office by only that fraction of 1 percent of the electorate that makes up a congressional district. In addition, Congress, in the second use of the 25th Amendment, has selected as Vice President a man who actually failed in several attempts to win election to national office. There has been no serious question in the public mind of President Ford's legitimacy, however. He is President. And this is perhaps the amendment's strongest point. But we must nevertheless ask ourselves does this departure from the central mechanism of democracy pose any long-run problems for the basic fabric of our system I And if not, why has it succeeded ? If we are concerned about the imperfections of the 25th amendment, which I think many of us are now, and many of us were at the time we were considering it several years ago, we must also ask ourselves how do we make it more perfect. What are the solutions which have less than perfection ?
17
I introduced the 25th amendment 11 years ago in the 88th Congress and, with the help of many others, including the distinguished Senator from Hawaii, guided it through the process of congressional approval and State ratification. We believed it was necessary to provide a mechanism to deal with two problems that were then much on the public mind. First, because of the tragic death of President Kennedy, we had no Vice President. This was the 16th such vacancy in our history. Second, the nature of the Kennedy assassination reminded us of the potential problem of the temporary physical or mental incapacity of a President. This question had arisen during President Eisenhower's term, and had been a nagging problem of concern to many since Woodrow Wilson's day.
I see our distinguished colleague from Maine is here, and I think I will ask unanimous consent to put the remainder of the statement in the record.
{The statement referred to follows :]
OPENINO STATEMENT BY SENATOR BIRCH BAYS, CHAIRMAN
Today the Subcommittee begins a series of hearings designed to review and analyze the implementation for the first time of Section 2 of the 25th Amendment to the Constitution and to examine various '01ncials that have been made for its modification.
Many serious students of democracy and the A:1, .lean experience have suggested that the events of recent months, which led to the elevation to our highest office of a man not directly selected by a vote of the people, raise fundamental questions about the nature of our democracy. Several serious propo .als have been put forward to change the existing Presidential succession mechanism. Because the Subcommittee believed that these concerns merited a full examination, we decided to convene these hearings.
Two things should, I think, -be pointed out initially. First, because our Constitution still contains the anachronistic electoral college system, we do not choose our Presidents by direct popular vote—something which hopefully Congress and the States will soon change by Constitutional amendment.
Second, since the ratification of the 12th Amendment, our Vice-Presidents are "elected" to the nation's second highest office only in the most technical sense. As one observor has commented, "It stretches reality to suggest that the voters of the country really chose to have Calvin Coolidge or Harry Truman as second in line for the Presidency."
Nevertheless, because of the use for the first time of the provisions of the 25th Amendment, we now have as our President a man who was actually elected to public office by only that fraction of one percent of the electorate that makes up a Congressional district. In addition, Congress, in the second use of the 25th Amendment, has selected as Vice-President a man who actually failed in several attempts to win election to national office. There has been no serious question in the public mind of President Ford's legitimacy. He is President. -And this is perhaps the amendment's strongest point. But we must nevertheless ask ourselves does this departure from the central mechanism of democracy pose any long-run problems for the basic fabric of our system? And if not, why has it succeeded? If we are concerned about the imperfections of the 25th Amendment, how do we perfect it?
I introduced the 25th Amendment eleven years ago in the 88th Congress and, with the help of many others, guided it through the process of Congressional approval and state ratification. We believed it was necessary to provide a mechanism to deal with two problems that were then much on the public mind. First, because of the tragic death of President Kennedy, we had no Vice-President. This was the 18th such vacancy in our history. Second, the nature of the Kennedy assassination reminded us of the potential problem of the temporary physical or mental incapacity of a President. This question had arisen during President Eisenhower's term and bad been a nagging problem of concern to many since Woodrow Wilson's day.
18
I think it is quite safe to say, however, that neither I nor any other member of Congress specifically foresaw that the provisions we drafted for the filling of a vacancy in the Vice-Presidency would first be used after the resignation of both the President and the Vice-President upon disclosure of unlawful acts. Indeed, if one looks back at the amendment's legislative history, the principal focus of controversy was on those sections dealing with Presidential disability rather than those providing for filling a Vice-Presidential vacancy. In almost 200 years, we had never lost both a President and a Vice-President during one four year term, though we had experienced the problem of Presidential disability on several occasions. However, the very fact that the 25th Amendment's first test came under these bizarre and unforeseen circumstances indicates to me in a very important way that we did not err in amending our governing document.
Some thoughtful men have strongly criticized our wisdom in adopting the 25th Amendment. These critics of the amendment, however, seem to overlook what may well have been its most significant contribution. Under the most adverse circumstances, it vastly facilitated the removal of a President who had totally lost the respect and confidence of the American people. I say this because, I do not believe that Richard Nixon would have resigned and turned the Presidency over to Speaker Carl Albert, a Democrat. The Nixon departure could have come, in the absence of the amendment, only after a difficult and divisive impeachment trial. Even the studious and deliberate considerations of the House Judiciary Committee, would, I am sure, have assumed a much more acrimonious and partisan nature.
It is easy to find fault with the 25th Amendment. It is much more difficult to envision an alternative solution which does not possess greater imperfections. What were the alternatives?
Prior to ratification of the 25th Amendment, the question of Presidential and therefor Vice-Presidential succession, was governed statutorily by the Presidential Succession Law which provides that if both the office of President and Vice-President are vacant, responsibility will fall on the Speaker of the House of Representatives, and next to the President Pro Tempore of the Senate. Neither of these congressional leaders is selected for their positions with any thought as to their qualifications for the Presidency. The people of the entire country would be unprepared for their sudden succession to the Presidency. As President Truman noted twenty years earlier, there was a clear need that "a plan of succession be devised so that the office of President would be filled by an officer who holds his position as a result of the expression of the will of the people." There were several plans suggested to meet the agreed upon criteria—the ability to serve as President, acceptability by the American people, and the ability to work with the President as Vice-President. The suggestions for choosing a new Vice-President fell into the following categories: (1) the choice should be made by the Electoral College; (2) by the President ; (3) by the Congress; (4) by the President and the Congress acting together ; (5) by a special election for Vice-President; or (6) that there should be two Vice-Presidents elected at the time of each general Presidential election.
The Electoral College was rejected on the ground that as a historical curiosity it would not command the respect and support of the American people. Most of our citizens have never met or heard the name of a Presidential elector.
A special election for Vice-President was rejected because of concern about delay, the departure from our system of quadrennial presidential elections, the
cost involved, the divisive partisan effect it would have on the country at a time when unity was needed and the possibility that a special election might produce a Vice-President of a different party who would not be able to work effectively with the President.
The selection of a new Vice-President by the Congress alone was objected to on the grounds that if the President and the majority of Congress represented different parties, Congress might not select a Vice-President from the President's party and thus the new Vice-President would not be able to work closely with
the President.
Presidential appointment was ruled out on the grounds that the people should be involved in_such an important choice, and that no President should be given the complete authority to appoint the person_ who could become his successor.
Finally, the election of two Vice-Presidents was not considered feasible because it might lead to confusion and divisiveness in the executive branch.
The method finally chosen, that of Presidential nomination and confirmation by majority vote of both Houses had, we believed, these virtues : first, it would assure
19
that the person nominated was a member of the President's own party and thus
of compatible temperament and views; second, the confirmation by both the
Senate and the House would tend to create public confidence in the selection. This involvement of both Houses of Congress, instead of only the Senate which has the traditional role of advise and consent, was deemed appropriate for the selection of the nation's second highest officer since it w( aid evaluate a Vice-Presidential selection over other Presidential appointments. This would, we hoped, more accurately reflect the wishes of the people than either House alone, and would thus increase public confidence in the final choke. It cannot be emphasized too strongly that the role of the Congress was to be—and is—in this one, unique instance that of surrogate electors. Congress is to represent the people of the country in a Congressional election of, and not merely acquiescence in, the choice of a new Vice-President.
I was deeply concerned that during the debate on the Rockefeller nomination many of may colleagues in the Senate did not recognize their independent role as surrogate electors for over 210 million American people. Congress Is to represent the people in electing a new Vice-President. This responsibility is quantitatively different than any other.
The 25th Amendment's first off-spring, President Ford, in his first address to the Congress very aptly summed up his responsibility and that of the Congress when he said, "Frequently, along the tortuous road of recent months, from this dumber to the President's-house, I protested that I was my own man. Now I realize that I was wrong. I am your man, for it was your carefully weighed confirmation that changed my occupation. I am the people's man, for you acted in their name, and I accepted and began a new solemn trust with a promise to serve all the people."
Most of us pray that we should never again experience any of those circumstances which in this instance, or in others, might require the use of the 25th Amendment. Unfortunately, history has shown us we pray in vain. Prudence requires that we he prepared for those eventualities of death, disability or disasters which may overtake a national leader. In my view, the 25th Amendment, with all of its implications, leaves us better prepared to meet the uncertainties of the future in an imperfect world ruled by imperfect men.
Senator atm. It is an honor to have with us one of our distinguished colleagues who has contributed greatly to our deliberations on many issues over the past months and years, and has expressed a deep concern over this matter which is before us. We appreciate the fact that, you have taken the time from a busy schedule, Senator Hathaway, to be here. Why do you not proceed please, sir? •
STATEMENT OF HON. WILLIAM D. HATHAWAY, A U.S. SENATOR
FROM THE STATE OF MAINE
Senator HATHAWAY. Thank you very much.
I suppose I could say the same thing you said about putting my state-
ment in the record. Anybody who has trouble sleeping nights could
read this in the record, but at the risk of boring you with something
that I have already talked about at the time President Ford was nomi-
nated by former President Nixon for Vice President, let me proceed.
I really appreciate the opportunity to come before this subcommittee
Mr. Chairman, Senator Fong, to discuss our recent experience with the 25th amendment. I should begin by congratulating the chairman for his foresight and his perseverance in the development and enactment of this amendment. I voted for it when I was in the House of Representatives: I am firmly convinced that its very existence was a critical factor in the avoidance of a major constitutional crisis last summer. Without the procedures it provided, the transfer of power which be-
came necessary would have been significantly more difficult.	_
I really do not come before this subcommittee this morning to criti-
cize the provisions of the 25th amendment. It seems to me to be a well-
20
balanced and reasonable method of handling a complex and a difficult problem.
I know Senator Pastore, who I believe has already testified, has submitted a bill providing for a special election of an appointed Vice President if he should suceed to the Presidency, and although I think that this resolution has considerable merit, I have some reservations about it which I will be glad to go into in detail if the committee wants me to, at the end of my statement.
My real interest today is to call attention to a particular facet of the question of Presidential succession which the 25th amendment does not deal with and to suggest a possible solution to that problem which would not require tampering with the amendment itself. I refer to the question of succession in the case of a double vacancy—the death or incapacity of both the President and the Vice President. Of course, the chances of this occurring have been greatly diminished by the adoption of section 2 of the amendment, providing for Presidential appointment to fill a vacancy in the Office of Vice President.
But, as we have learned, the mechanics of this process still allow some substantial period between the occurrence of the vacancy and the confirmation of a new Vice President. In this regard, I would point out that we have been without a Vice President for 6 of the last 16 months, even with the terms of the 25th amendment fully operational. The significance of a Vice Presidential appointment—and the importance of its confirmation—does not allow for a hurry-up process, nor should we want it to. Because of the uniqueness of providing for the appointment of such an official, a reasonable amount of time must be allowed for maximum consideration and citizen input into the decision. For this reason, the question of succession should something happen to the President during one of these periods, is one which deserves serious consideration.
A second reason the present succession arrangement deserves scrutiny is its relationship to the confirmation process itself under the 25th amendment. It is my concern that the present succession act can create a pressure on the Congress to act hastily or imprudently in the confirmation of a Vice Presidential nominee.
As an example, consider a situation similar to the one which faced us in the fall of 1973: A vacancy in the Vice Presidency with the President under the threat of impeachment by a Congress controlled by the opposition party. The Congress is faced with several difficult alternatives; (1) move ahead with impeachment, even though this would place one of its own—the Speaker of the House—in the Presidency or (2) confirm the Vice Presidential nominee (in order to clear the way for impeachment) even though his patron may turn out to be a wrongdoer. A preferable alternative might have been to await the outcome of the impeachment proceedings and complete the confirmation when and if the President was exonerated.
A similar situation could arise where a vacancy occurs and the President has a fatal illness; again, the pressure is on Congress to confirm in order to avoid the appearance of foot dragging to promote the Speaker of the House. In both cases—or in others I am sure could be dreamt up—a pressure to confirm is placed on the Congress which might well conflict with our best judgment as to the proper length of the confirmation process, or even what its final outcome should be. My basic point,
21
Mr. Chairman, is that the Speaker's present place in the line of succession creates an inherent conflict of interest, a conflict so obvious that our efforts to avoid the appearance of improper motives can actually impair our performance of other constitutional tasks.
Senator BAyn. Would the Senator yield just a moment?
Senator HATHAWAY. Certainly.
Senator BAYII. Are you saying either directly or by inference that you have a dual problem? On one hand, if you have the wrong kind of man there who is selfish and power hungry, there would be foot Brag-
g ina in the House so that lie might succeed. On the other hand, the 0
situation which we have just gone through, where the Speaker could not in any way have been accused of that. We might not take as long and be as prudent as otherwise would be the case, to avoid the appearance of playing politics.
Senator HATHAWAY. Yes. That is correct. As the law stands now, our safety net—that is, the present succession act—is not very satisfactory, especially when the Speaker of the House belongs to a party different from that of the President. My suggestion is to alter the succession act in such a way so as to remove this pressure from the Congress and provide a more palatable succession mechanism, should its use become necessary.
My proposal would provide that in the case of a vacancy occurring in the offices of both the President and the Vice President, there will be a special Presidential election with the highest ranking officer of the House of Representatives of the same party as the outgoing President serving as acting President until such election is held. This approach is identical in principle to the Succession Act of 1792 which was enacted in the Second Congress by some of the same individuals who drafted the Constitution, and which remained in force and effect as law of this land for 94 years. I should also point out that it is substantially the same as the succession act proposal submitted to the Congress by President Truman in 1945. The original act was altered in 1886 and again in 1916, with the result that under present law the Speaker of the House succeeds when a double vacancy occurs.
Under the bill I am proposing, the term of the specially elected President would be limited to the time that is remaining in the outgoing President's unexpired term. In this way, the traditional rhythm of our quadrennial Presidential elections, falling as they do every leap year, would remain undisturbed. As to the procedure to be followed in nominating and selecting candidates, the bill would leave this to State law, as is currently required by our Constitution. I would assume that should this measure be enacted, the State would move expeditiously to enact appropriate legislation with regard to a. possible special election so that the 90-day time table in the bill could be met.
There seems to be little question of the constitutionality of the special election approach to the resolution of a double vacancy problem. The Constitution expressly provides that succession, in the case of a double vacancy, is a matter to be determined by statute and, as noted earlier, the first statute passed in this area did provide for such an election. For the benefit of the chairman and any other committee members interested in this question, I have submitted with my remarks an excellent memorandum on the question done by the Congressional Research Service as well as a letter from three eminent constitutional
•	22
	scholars, Paul A. Freund, Raoul Berger, and Abram Chaves, attesting that—"In our view, the constitutional text, the debates at Philadelphia and the practice under the Constitution leave no doubt that the Congress has the power to provide by statute for a special Presidential election in the event the offices of President and Vice President both become vacant."
	By Mr. Hathaway
	S. 2678. A bill to provide for a special election for the Offices of President and Vice President when the Offices of President and Vice President are both vacant. Referred to the Committee on Rules and Administration.
	Mr. HATHAWAY. Mr. President, I am today introducing legislation which would provide for a special Presidential election should the Offices of President and Vice President both be vacant at the same time.
	In candor, I must admit that this bill is intended to deal specifically with the potential situation confronting the Congress should the present President resign or be removed from Office before the confirmation of his Vice-Presidential designee. But while the present situation may have engendered consideration of this approach to Presidential succession, the principle it establishes is a sound one of general applicability to circumstances of a similar nature.
	In essence, the bill provides that in the case of a vacancy occurring in the Offices of both the President and Vice President, there will be a special Presidential election, with the highest ranking officer of the House of Representatives of the same party as the outgoing President serving as acting President until such election is held. This approach is identical in principle to the Succession Act of 1792 which Was enacted in the 2d Congress by some of the same individuals who drafted the Constitution and which remained in force for 94 years. This act was altered in 1888 and again in 1947 with the result that under present law the Speaker of the House succeeds when a double vacancy occurs, I have attempted in the bill to deal with one of the major ambiguities of the 1792 act, which is whether the term of the new President would be 4 years or for the remainder of the unexpired term of his predecessor.
	Under the bill I am proposing, the term of the specially elected President would be limited to the time remaining in the outgoing President's unexpired term. In this way, the traditional rhythm of our quadrennial Presidential elections, falling as they do every leap year, would remain undisturbed. As to the procedure to be followed in nominating and selecting candidates, the bill would leave this to State law, as is currently required by the Constitution. I would assume that should this measure be enacted the States would more expeditiously to enact legislation with regard to a possible special election so that the 90-day time table in the bill could be met.
	There seems to be little question of the constitutionality of the special election approach to the resolution of a double vacancy problem. The Constitution expressly provides that succession, in the case of a double vacancy, is a matter to be determined by statute and, as noted earlier, the first statute passed in this area did provide for such an election. For the benefit of my colleagues interested in this question, I will have printed in the RECORD at the end of my remarks an excellent memorandum on the question done by the Congressional Research Service as well as a letter from three eminent constitutional scholars, Paul A. Freund, Raoul Berger, and Abram Chayes attesting that—
	In our view, the Constitutional text, the debates at Philadelphia and the practice under the Constitution leave no doubt that the Congress has the power to provide by statute for a special Presidential election in the event the offices of President and Vice President both become vacant.
	Assuming the constitutionality of a special election then, why would this approach be better than the presently established system? This question, it seems to me, boils down to one of the legitimacy of government in a democratic society. My introduction of this plan intends no disrespect for the distinguished Speaker of the House, who would fill a Presidential vacancy should one Occur under present law. But the Speaker of the House has never sought the Presidency nor have all the voters of the Nation had an opportunity to pass on his qualifications for this awesome Office. Furthermore, my introduction of this plan intends no disrespect for the distinguished minority leader of the House who has been nominated as Vice President by the President. But the same considerations
23
apply—Mr. FORD has never sought the Presidency nor stood before the national electorate. Further, there is something troubling about a President who is under threat of impeachment or forced resignation having the power to name his successor.
In either case—the succession of Mr. FORD or Mr. AraraT—the country would have a President not elected by the people. This result I find incompatible with the basic principles upon which the Nation was founded and upon which the legitimacy of our form of government rests.
It will be charged, I suppose, that what I am proposing constitutes a political attempt to nullify the mandate of the voters in the last election. I should say first that in making these remarks I indicate no prejudgment of the outcome of the current controversy surrounding the President. My remarks and my proposal are directed solely to what happens if a vacancy occurs, not whether such a vacancy ought to occur. When put In this context, such charges have little merit. The mandate of last November's election belongs to Richard Nixon and Spiro Agnew, not their political party. While winning the White House, Republicans actually lost strength in the Senate and among the Nation's Governors. Given this fact, who is to say with any assurance what the mandate of 1972 was? Second, I cannot accept the charge of "power grab" or "coup" when the question is actually being returned to the people, the ultimate arbiters of power within our system.
If the President leaves office, the mandate of last year is negated ; it seems logical to me to allow the people themselves to decide who shall then receive what only they can rightfully give.
Finally, and this is one of the differences between my bill and the original 1792 Succession Act, my proposal would provide that the "interim" President—. who would serve between the occurrence of the vacancy and the special election—would in fact be a member of the political party of the outgoing President. In this way whatever party mandate which does attach at the preceding Presidential election would be maintained until the people render their new judgment. In the present case, the highest ranking officer of the House who is of the same party as the previous President, and who would under my proposal, become Acting President, is GERALD FORD of Michigan.
Before concluding my remarks, I should acknowledge a debt of gratitude to several individuals whose wisdom have made this proposal possible. I refer of course to Professors Freund, Berger, and Chayes, who have provided advice on the constitutionality of the special election, although they have not considered the specific provisions of this bill, and also especially to Mayor Kevin White of Boston who first discovered the possibilities of this procedure and brought it to
the attention of the Nation.
These are troubled and difficult times far all of us. The measure I propose will not settle events finally or immediately. But it will insure that control of our basic decisions and, indeed, our very future will remain directly in the hands of the
people.
Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent to have printed in the Record the two documents I have mentioned in the course of my remarks, the letter from the law professors and the Library of Congress report on this matter ; and I further ask unanimous consent that the bill be printed in the Record.
There being no objection, the material was ordered to be printed in the Record,
as follows :
LAW SCHOOL OF HARVARD UNIVERSITY,
Cambridge, Mass., November 1, 1973.
Hon. KEVIN H. WHITE,
Mayor of Boston,
Boston, Mass.
DEAR MAYOR WHITE: You have asked if, under the Constitution, Congress has the power to provide by statute for a special election to fill the office of President in the event that both the offices of President and Vice President become vacant.
In our opinion, Congress has such power.
Article 2, section 1, clause 6 of the Constitution provides :
"In Case of the Removal of the President from Office, or of his Death, Resignation, or Inability to discharge the Powers and Duties of the said Office, the Same shall devolve on the Vice President, and the Congress may by Law provide for the Case of Removal, Death, Resignation, or Inability, both of the President and Vice
24
President, declaring what Officer shall then act as President, and such Officer shall act accordingly, until the Disability be removed, or a President shall be elected." The matter was expressly considered in the Constitutional Convention and the debates show conclusively that the Framers intended to empower the Congress to
call a special election in those circumstances.	•
On September 7, 1787, it was moved in the Convention that the Legislature should designate by law which officer of the United States would act as President in the event of vacancies in the offices of both President and Vice President and that "such officer shall arrive." James Madison objected to this language on the ground that it would prevent the vacancy in the Presidency from being filled by a special election. He therefore moved to change the language to read that the officer who was designated to "act as President" do so "until such Disability be removed, or a President shall be elected." Madison's amendment was carried and with minor stylistic changes was incorporated in the final text of the Constitution.
The Second Congress, of which Madison himself was a member, exercised this very power when it enacted the Succession Act of March 1, 1792, providing for a special election in the event of a simultaneous vacancy in both Presidential and Vice Presidential offices. 1 Stat. 239. Actions of the First and Second Congresses are traditionally given great weight on questions of Constitutional Interpretation. Myers v. U.S. 272 U.S. 52. 175 (1926).
The text of the relevant sections of the Act of 1792 is attached to this letter. You will note that the Act provided for the special election to be omitted if the double vacancy occurred within six months of the expiration of the Presidential term. It also stipulated that the president pro tempore of the Senate (and if there was none the Speaker of the House) should act in the interim until the special election ; and that the person elected should serve for a term of four years from the next inauguration day following the special election. These features are remarked here not to suggest that they are Constitutionally required, but to indicate the flexibility that is available to the Congress in dealing with the practical questions involved in a special election.
The Act of 1792 remained law for almost a century. Then the mechanism of Presidential succession was changed to provide that in the event of the vacancy of both the offices of President and Vice President, one or another member of the Cabinet in the order therein provided should "act as President." But the statute went on to provide that Congress should assemble within twenty days, presumably to consider what further action to take.
The 1886 statute was in turn replaced in 1947 with the present law providing that in the event of the vacancy of both the offices of President and Vice President, the Speaker of the House of Representatives would act as President to be followed by the President pro tempore of the Senate to be followed by ranked Cabinet officers for the remainder of the then Presidential term. 3 U.S.C. 19.
These subsequent enactments are further evidence of the broad and flexible authority available to Congress in fulfilling its Constitutional mandate to provide for continuity in the office of President in case of "removal, death, resignation or inability of both the President and Vice President."
In our view, the Constitutional text, the debates at Philadelphia and the practice under the Constitution leave no doubt that the Congress has the power to provide by statute for a special Presidential election in the event the offices of President and Vice President both become vacant.
Yours very truly,
PAUL A. FREUND. ABRAM CHAYE8. RAOUL BERGER.
ATTACHMENT
(Second Congress. Session. 1. Ch. 8. 1792, 1 Stat. 239.)
SEC. 9. And be it further enacted, That in case of removal, death, resignation or inability both of the President and Vice President of the United States, the President of the Senate pro tempore, and in case there shall be no President of the Senate, then the Speaker of the House of Representatives, for the time being shall act as President of the United States until the disability be removed or a President shall be elected.
SEC. 10. And be it further enacted, That whenever the offices of President and Vice President shall both become vacant, the Secretary of State shall forthwith cause a notification thereof to be made to the executive of every state, and shall
25
also cause the same to be published in at least one of the newspapers printed in each state, specifying that electors of the President of the United States shall be appointed or chosen in the several states within thirty-four days preceding the first Wednesday in December then next ensuing: Provided, There shall be the space of two months between the date of such notification and the said first Wednesday in December, but if there shall not be the space of two months between the date of such notification and the first Wednesday in December; and if the term for which the President and Vice President last in office were elected shall not expire on the third day of March next ensuing, then the Secretary of State shall specify in the notification that the electors shall be appointed or chosen within thirty-four days preceding the first Wednesday in December in the year next ensuing, within which time the electors shall accordingly be appointed or chosen, and the electors shall meet and give their votes on the said first Wednesday in December, and the proceedings and duties of the said electors and others shall be pursuant to the directions prescribed in this act.
SEO. 12. And be it further enacted, That the term of four years for which a President and Vice President shall be elected shall in all cases commence on the fourth day of March next succeeding the day on which the votes of the electors shall have been given.
Approved, March 1, 1792.
CONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH SERVICE,
Washington, D.C.
From : American Law Division.
Subject : Provision for Special Election in Event of Vacancies in Offices of President and Vice President.
This is in response to your request for consideration of the constitutional validity of a provision for special elections to fill the offices of President and Vice President when both become vacant. It appears that the language of the Constitution does not preclude provision for such an election and may be read to support that alternative; when the debates in the Constitutional Convention are review, such support becomes much clearer and stronger. It therefore may be concluded that the proposal under consideration is consistent with the Constitution.
Although the Constitution has been amended twice now in some respects of presidential succession' the pertinent language remains that of Art. II, f 1, el. 6. "In Case of the Removal of the President from Office, or of his Death, Resignation or Inability to discharge the Powers and Duties of the said Office, the same shall devolve on the Vice President, and the Congress may by law provide for the Case of Removal, Death, Resignation or Inability, both of the President and Vice President, declaring what Officer shall then act as President, and such Officer shall act accordingly, until the Disability be removed, or a President shall be elected."
The final clause "or a President shall be elected" is, of course, consistent with the view that the designated officer should serve until the next regular presidential election or with the view that Congress could provide for a special election. In any event, the language does not preclude the calling of such an election. But the Convention materials amply demonstrate that authority for Congress to call a special election in the event of a vacancy in both offices was intended.
The report of the Committee on Detail, which had considered and blended many of the details of various plans offered to the Convention, contained the following language with regard to succession. It will be noted that no provision for a Vice President had yet been made. "In case of his removal as aforesaid, death, resignation, or disability to discharge the powers and duties of his office, the President of the Senate shall exercise those powers and duties, until another President of the United States be chosen, or until the disability of the President be removed." 2 M. Farrand (ed.), The Records of the Federal Convention 0141187 (New Haven rev. ed. 1937). 188. Madison reported no debate on this la g' when the sections on the Presidency were considered on August 24, 26 and 27. It is noted that consideration of the entire clause was postponed because some members were concerned about the ambiguousness of the word "disability", Id., 427, and on August 81 all postponed sections were referred to the Committee of Eleven for consideration. Id., 478. The above quoted language thus went to the Committee as reported.
120th Amendment If 3, 4 ; 25th Amendment.
