Fordham Law School
FLASH: The Fordham Law Archive of Scholarship and History
Congressional Materials	Twenty-Fifth Amendment Archive
3-28-2017
50th Anniversary of the Twenty-Fifth Amendment
and Tribute to Birch Bayh
Joseph Donnelly
Follow this and additional works at: http://ir.lawnet.fordham.edu/
twentyfifth_amendment_congressional_materials
Part of the Law Commons 
Recommended Citation
Donnelly, Joseph, "50th Anniversary of the Twenty-Fifth Amendment and Tribute to Birch Bayh" (2017). Congressional Materials. 22. http://ir.lawnet.fordham.edu/twentyfifth_amendment_congressional_materials/22
This Book is brought to you for free and open access by the Twenty-Fifth Amendment Archive at FLASH: The Fordham Law Archive of Scholarship and History. It has been accepted for inclusion in Congressional Materials by an authorized administrator of FLASH: The Fordham Law Archive of Scholarship and History. For more information, please contact tmelnick@law.fordham.edu.
S2046	CONGRESSIONAL RECORD —SENATE	March 28, 2017
paid family leave and affordable higher education and greater representation in this very Chamber.
I invite every Senator to do the same, both because those are the right battles and because fighting them protects gender equality progress that has been so hard-won by the women of this Nation. We must not allow those victories to be reversed. We must keep progressing.
This Women’s History Month, I am reminded of what the poet G.D. Anderson once said: “Feminism is not about making women strong. Women are already strong. It’s about changing the way the world perceives that strength.” Let us remember it is precisely that strength that has propelled our world forward. It is precisely that strength that serves as the foundation of so many of this country’s successes, and it is precisely that strength we must remember and meet with our own, when women’s rights are under siege.
f50TH ANNIVERSARY OF THE 25TH AMENDMENT AND TRIBUTE TO BIRCH BAYH
Mr. DONNELLY. Mr. President, today I wish to honor the 50th anniversary of the ratification of the 25th Amendment and recognize one of my predecessors from Indiana in the U.S. Senate, Birch Bayh. Birch Bayh represented Indiana for three terms in the Senate, from 1963 to 1981. Senator Bayh was an accomplished lawyer, legislator, and the only non-Founding Father to draft two amendments to the U.S. Constitution that were enacted.
February 2017 marked the 50th anniversary of the ratification of the 25th Amendment to the Constitution. The 25th Amendment created an orderly transition of power in the case of death or disability of the President and a method of selecting a Vice President when a vacancy occurs in that office. Before its passage, our Nation experienced several occasions when the President was unable to perform his powers and duties, with no constitutional provision for temporary transfer of these powers to the Vice President. The amendment was first relied upon following the resignations of Vice President Spiro Agnew and President Richard Nixon. It also provided the basis for President Ronald Reagan to temporarily pass his duties to Vice President George H. Bush when President Reagan underwent surgery.
While we all hope not to have to use the 25th Amendment, having an established process that continues to guide administrations faced with unexpected events is essential for any functional democracy. Senator Bayh played a key leadership role in the Senate by drafting this constitutional amendment and ensuring all necessary steps were taken for its ratification in 1967.
Senator Bayh also drafted the 26th Amendment, which changed the voting age from 21 to 18. Its impetus was the passage of amendments to the Voting Rights Act in 1970 that set 18 as the minimum voting age for both Federal and State elections. When the Supreme Court ruled in Oregon v. Mitchell that the law applied only to Federal, not State elections, Congress adopted the 26th Amendment. Just over 3 months later, on July 1, 1971, three-fourths of the States had ratified the amendment, making it the quickest amendment ever to be adopted.
In addition to these two constitutional amendments, Senator Bayh wrote the landmark title IX to the Higher Education Act, which mandates equal opportunities for women students and faculty. Senator Bayh was also an architect of the Juvenile Justice Act of 1974, which requires the separation of juvenile offenders from adult prison populations, and he played a vital role in the drafting and passage of the landmark 1964 Civil Rights Act and the 1965 Voting Rights Act.
Since leaving the Senate in 1980, Senator Bayh has committed himself to leadership in civic policy. He has served as chairman of the University of Virginia’s Miller Center Commission on Presidential Disability and the 25th Amendment and as a member of the center’s Commission on Federal Judicial Selection. He is also founding chairman of the National Institute Against Prejudice and Violence, a nonprofit, first-of-its-kind organization dedicated to studying prejudice and hate crimes in America.
Senator Bayh, as you and your wife, Kitty, enjoy your retirement, the contributions you have made to our country endure. The indelible mark you have made on the orderly transition of power and preservation of justice is still celebrated with pride today as we commemorate the 50th anniversary of the 25th Amendment. Recently, the American Bar Association honored you with a Presidential citation for exhibiting the highest standards of public service as a lawyer and for extraordinary leadership on issues of law and justice, including the 25th Amendment. You are richly deserving of these accolades, as well as the gratitude of this Senate and the American people, for your lifetime of service.
fTRIBUTE TO GENERAL HERBERT “HAWK” CARLISLE
Mr. MCCAIN. Mr. President, I wish to offer my congratulations to Gen. Herbert “Hawk” Carlisle on the occasion of his retirement from the U.S. Air Force this month.
Over four decades of distinguished service, from the Air Force Academy to the Pentagon to leadership in two four-star commands, General Carlisle has been instrumental in advancing the capabilities of our Air Force and improving the lives of its most precious asset—its airmen.
As commander of Pacific Air Forces, General Carlisle was responsible for Air Force activities spanning more than half the globe, leading 45,000 airmen across the Pacific from Hawaii and Alaska to Japan and Korea. He provided critical strategic leadership as the United States worked to strengthen its commitment to peace and prosperity in the Asia-Pacific Region at time of increasing challenge.
Under General Carlisle’s leadership, the airmen of Air Combat Command pressed the fight against America’s adversaries, delivering devastating effects against violent extremism in Afghanistan, Iraq, and Syria. General Carlisle’s determination and hard work were essential to bringing the Air Force’s F–35A Joint Strike Fighter to initial operational capability—no small achievement for a long-delayed and troubled program, yet one that is so critical for sustaining America’s military dominance into the future.
I had the pleasure of getting to know General Carlisle when he served as director of the Air Force’s Legislative Liaison Office. It was then that I came to appreciate his honesty and candor. Those of us tasked with the oversight of the Department of Defense and our Armed Forces rely upon the candor of our senior military leaders. In my interactions with General Carlisle in various positions through the years, whether in private meetings or in public testimony, I could always count on General Carlisle to provide his best military advice on critical defense matters affecting the Air Force and our Nation. I hope his successors will follow in that same spirit of transparency and collaboration. I also hope that my colleagues and I will continue to benefit from General Carlisle’s wise counsel.
Once again, I want to express my sincere thanks to General Carlisle for his distinguished service to our country and congratulate him on a well-earned retirement. I wish General Carlisle and his family all the best as he embarks on the next chapter of his life.
f
MESSAGE FROM THE HOUSE
At 11:15 a.m., a message from the House of Representatives, delivered by Mr. Novotny, one of its reading clerks, announced that the House has passed the following bills, in which it requests the concurrence of the Senate:
H.R. 654. An act to direct the Administrator of the Federal Emergency Management Agency to carry out a plan for the purchase and installation of an earthquake early warning system for the Cascadia Subduction Zone, and for other purposes.
H.R. 1117. An act to require the Administrator of the Federal Emergency Management Agency to submit a report regarding certain plans regarding assistance to applicants and grantees during the response to an emergency or disaster.
H.R. 1214. An act to require the Administrator of the Federal Emergency Management Agency to conduct a program to use simplified procedures to issue public assistance for certain projects under the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act, and for other purposes.
